“If we can persuade your father to all this,” said Lady Russell,
looking over her paper, “much may be done. If he will adopt these
regulations, in seven years he will be clear; and I hope we may be able
to convince him and Elizabeth, that Kellynch Hall has a respectability
in itself which cannot be affected by these reductions; and that the
true dignity of Sir Walter Elliot will be very far from lessened in the
eyes of sensible people, by acting like a man of principle. What will
he be doing, in fact, but what very many of our first families have
done, or ought to do? There will be nothing singular in his case; and
it is singularity which often makes the worst part of our suffering, as
it always does of our conduct. I have great hope of prevailing. We must
be serious and decided; for after all, the person who has contracted
debts must pay them; and though a great deal is due to the feelings of
the gentleman, and the head of a house, like your father, there is
still more due to the character of an honest man.”

This was the principle on which Anne wanted her father to be
proceeding, his friends to be urging him. She considered it as an act
of indispensable duty to clear away the claims of creditors with all
the expedition which the most comprehensive retrenchments could secure,
and saw no dignity in anything short of it. She wanted it to be
prescribed, and felt as a duty. She rated Lady Russell’s influence
highly; and as to the severe degree of self-denial which her own
conscience prompted, she believed there might be little more difficulty
in persuading them to a complete, than to half a reformation. Her
knowledge of her father and Elizabeth inclined her to think that the
sacrifice of one pair of horses would be hardly less painful than of
both, and so on, through the whole list of Lady Russell’s too gentle
reductions.

How Anne’s more rigid requisitions might have been taken is of little
consequence. Lady Russell’s had no success at all: could not be put up
with, were not to be borne. “What! every comfort of life knocked off!
Journeys, London, servants, horses, table—contractions and restrictions
every where! To live no longer with the decencies even of a private
gentleman! No, he would sooner quit Kellynch Hall at once, than remain
in it on such disgraceful terms.”

“Quit Kellynch Hall.” The hint was immediately taken up by Mr Shepherd,
whose interest was involved in the reality of Sir Walter’s retrenching,
and who was perfectly persuaded that nothing would be done without a
change of abode. “Since the idea had been started in the very quarter
which ought to dictate, he had no scruple,” he said, “in confessing his
judgement to be entirely on that side. It did not appear to him that
Sir Walter could materially alter his style of living in a house which
had such a character of hospitality and ancient dignity to support. In
any other place Sir Walter might judge for himself; and would be looked
up to, as regulating the modes of life in whatever way he might choose
to model his household.”

Sir Walter would quit Kellynch Hall; and after a very few days more of
doubt and indecision, the great question of whither he should go was
settled, and the first outline of this important change made out.

There had been three alternatives, London, Bath, or another house in
the country. All Anne’s wishes had been for the latter. A small house
in their own neighbourhood, where they might still have Lady Russell’s
society, still be near Mary, and still have the pleasure of sometimes
seeing the lawns and groves of Kellynch, was the object of her
ambition. But the usual fate of Anne attended her, in having something
very opposite from her inclination fixed on. She disliked Bath, and did
not think it agreed with her; and Bath was to be her home.

Sir Walter had at first thought more of London; but Mr Shepherd felt
that he could not be trusted in London, and had been skilful enough to
dissuade him from it, and make Bath preferred. It was a much safer
place for a gentleman in his predicament: he might there be important
at comparatively little expense. Two material advantages of Bath over
London had of course been given all their weight: its more convenient
distance from Kellynch, only fifty miles, and Lady Russell’s spending
some part of every winter there; and to the very great satisfaction of
Lady Russell, whose first views on the projected change had been for
Bath, Sir Walter and Elizabeth were induced to believe that they should
lose neither consequence nor enjoyment by settling there.

Lady Russell felt obliged to oppose her dear Anne’s known wishes. It
would be too much to expect Sir Walter to descend into a small house in
his own neighbourhood. Anne herself would have found the mortifications
of it more than she foresaw, and to Sir Walter’s feelings they must
have been dreadful. And with regard to Anne’s dislike of Bath, she
considered it as a prejudice and mistake arising, first, from the
circumstance of her having been three years at school there, after her
mother’s death; and secondly, from her happening to be not in perfectly
good spirits the only winter which she had afterwards spent there with
herself.

Lady Russell was fond of Bath, in short, and disposed to think it must
suit them all; and as to her young friend’s health, by passing all the
warm months with her at Kellynch Lodge, every danger would be avoided;
and it was in fact, a change which must do both health and spirits
good. Anne had been too little from home, too little seen. Her spirits
were not high. A larger society would improve them. She wanted her to
be more known.

The undesirableness of any other house in the same neighbourhood for
Sir Walter was certainly much strengthened by one part, and a very
material part of the scheme, which had been happily engrafted on the
beginning. He was not only to quit his home, but to see it in the hands
of others; a trial of fortitude, which stronger heads than Sir Walter’s
have found too much. Kellynch Hall was to be let. This, however, was a
profound secret, not to be breathed beyond their own circle.

Sir Walter could not have borne the degradation of being known to
design letting his house. Mr Shepherd had once mentioned the word
“advertise,” but never dared approach it again. Sir Walter spurned the
idea of its being offered in any manner; forbad the slightest hint
being dropped of his having such an intention; and it was only on the
supposition of his being spontaneously solicited by some most
unexceptionable applicant, on his own terms, and as a great favour,
that he would let it at all.

How quick come the reasons for approving what we like! Lady Russell had
another excellent one at hand, for being extremely glad that Sir Walter
and his family were to remove from the country. Elizabeth had been
lately forming an intimacy, which she wished to see interrupted. It was
with the daughter of Mr Shepherd, who had returned, after an
unprosperous marriage, to her father’s house, with the additional
burden of two children. She was a clever young woman, who understood
the art of pleasing—the art of pleasing, at least, at Kellynch Hall;
and who had made herself so acceptable to Miss Elliot, as to have been
already staying there more than once, in spite of all that Lady
Russell, who thought it a friendship quite out of place, could hint of
caution and reserve.

Lady Russell, indeed, had scarcely any influence with Elizabeth, and
seemed to love her, rather because she would love her, than because
Elizabeth deserved it. She had never received from her more than
outward attention, nothing beyond the observances of complaisance; had
never succeeded in any point which she wanted to carry, against
previous inclination. She had been repeatedly very earnest in trying to
get Anne included in the visit to London, sensibly open to all the
injustice and all the discredit of the selfish arrangements which shut
her out, and on many lesser occasions had endeavoured to give Elizabeth
the advantage of her own better judgement and experience; but always in
vain: Elizabeth would go her own way; and never had she pursued it in
more decided opposition to Lady Russell than in this selection of Mrs
Clay; turning from the society of so deserving a sister, to bestow her
affection and confidence on one who ought to have been nothing to her
but the object of distant civility.

From situation, Mrs Clay was, in Lady Russell’s estimate, a very
unequal, and in her character she believed a very dangerous companion;
and a removal that would leave Mrs Clay behind, and bring a choice of
more suitable intimates within Miss Elliot’s reach, was therefore an
object of first-rate importance.

CHAPTER III.

“I must take leave to observe, Sir Walter,” said Mr Shepherd one
morning at Kellynch Hall, as he laid down the newspaper, “that the
present juncture is much in our favour. This peace will be turning all
our rich naval officers ashore. They will be all wanting a home. Could
not be a better time, Sir Walter, for having a choice of tenants, very
responsible tenants. Many a noble fortune has been made during the war.
If a rich admiral were to come in our way, Sir Walter—”

“He would be a very lucky man, Shepherd,” replied Sir Walter; “that’s
all I have to remark. A prize indeed would Kellynch Hall be to him;
rather the greatest prize of all, let him have taken ever so many
before; hey, Shepherd?”

Mr Shepherd laughed, as he knew he must, at this wit, and then added—

“I presume to observe, Sir Walter, that, in the way of business,
gentlemen of the navy are well to deal with. I have had a little
knowledge of their methods of doing business; and I am free to confess
that they have very liberal notions, and are as likely to make
desirable tenants as any set of people one should meet with. Therefore,
Sir Walter, what I would take leave to suggest is, that if in
consequence of any rumours getting abroad of your intention; which must
be contemplated as a possible thing, because we know how difficult it
is to keep the actions and designs of one part of the world from the
notice and curiosity of the other; consequence has its tax; I, John
Shepherd, might conceal any family-matters that I chose, for nobody
would think it worth their while to observe me; but Sir Walter Elliot
has eyes upon him which it may be very difficult to elude; and
therefore, thus much I venture upon, that it will not greatly surprise
me if, with all our caution, some rumour of the truth should get
abroad; in the supposition of which, as I was going to observe, since
applications will unquestionably follow, I should think any from our
wealthy naval commanders particularly worth attending to; and beg leave
to add, that two hours will bring me over at any time, to save you the
trouble of replying.”

Sir Walter only nodded. But soon afterwards, rising and pacing the
room, he observed sarcastically—

“There are few among the gentlemen of the navy, I imagine, who would
not be surprised to find themselves in a house of this description.”

“They would look around them, no doubt, and bless their good fortune,”
said Mrs Clay, for Mrs Clay was present: her father had driven her
over, nothing being of so much use to Mrs Clay’s health as a drive to
Kellynch: “but I quite agree with my father in thinking a sailor might
be a very desirable tenant. I have known a good deal of the profession;
and besides their liberality, they are so neat and careful in all their
ways! These valuable pictures of yours, Sir Walter, if you chose to
leave them, would be perfectly safe. Everything in and about the house
would be taken such excellent care of! The gardens and shrubberies
would be kept in almost as high order as they are now. You need not be
afraid, Miss Elliot, of your own sweet flower gardens being neglected.”

“As to all that,” rejoined Sir Walter coolly, “supposing I were induced
to let my house, I have by no means made up my mind as to the
privileges to be annexed to it. I am not particularly disposed to
favour a tenant. The park would be open to him of course, and few navy
officers, or men of any other description, can have had such a range;
but what restrictions I might impose on the use of the
pleasure-grounds, is another thing. I am not fond of the idea of my
shrubberies being always approachable; and I should recommend Miss
Elliot to be on her guard with respect to her flower garden. I am very
little disposed to grant a tenant of Kellynch Hall any extraordinary
favour, I assure you, be he sailor or soldier.”

After a short pause, Mr Shepherd presumed to say—

“In all these cases, there are established usages which make everything
plain and easy between landlord and tenant. Your interest, Sir Walter,
is in pretty safe hands. Depend upon me for taking care that no tenant
has more than his just rights. I venture to hint, that Sir Walter
Elliot cannot be half so jealous for his own, as John Shepherd will be
for him.”

Here Anne spoke—

“The navy, I think, who have done so much for us, have at least an
equal claim with any other set of men, for all the comforts and all the
privileges which any home can give. Sailors work hard enough for their
comforts, we must all allow.”

“Very true, very true. What Miss Anne says, is very true,” was Mr
Shepherd’s rejoinder, and “Oh! certainly,” was his daughter’s; but Sir
Walter’s remark was, soon afterwards—

“The profession has its utility, but I should be sorry to see any
friend of mine belonging to it.”

“Indeed!” was the reply, and with a look of surprise.

“Yes; it is in two points offensive to me; I have two strong grounds of
objection to it. First, as being the means of bringing persons of
obscure birth into undue distinction, and raising men to honours which
their fathers and grandfathers never dreamt of; and secondly, as it
cuts up a man’s youth and vigour most horribly; a sailor grows old
sooner than any other man. I have observed it all my life. A man is in
greater danger in the navy of being insulted by the rise of one whose
father, his father might have disdained to speak to, and of becoming
prematurely an object of disgust himself, than in any other line. One
day last spring, in town, I was in company with two men, striking
instances of what I am talking of; Lord St Ives, whose father we all
know to have been a country curate, without bread to eat; I was to give
place to Lord St Ives, and a certain Admiral Baldwin, the most
deplorable-looking personage you can imagine; his face the colour of
mahogany, rough and rugged to the last degree; all lines and wrinkles,
nine grey hairs of a side, and nothing but a dab of powder at top. ‘In
the name of heaven, who is that old fellow?’ said I to a friend of mine
who was standing near, (Sir Basil Morley). ‘Old fellow!’ cried Sir
Basil, ‘it is Admiral Baldwin. What do you take his age to be?’
‘Sixty,’ said I, ‘or perhaps sixty-two.’ ‘Forty,’ replied Sir Basil,
‘forty, and no more.’ Picture to yourselves my amazement; I shall not
easily forget Admiral Baldwin. I never saw quite so wretched an example
of what a sea-faring life can do; but to a degree, I know it is the
same with them all: they are all knocked about, and exposed to every
climate, and every weather, till they are not fit to be seen. It is a
pity they are not knocked on the head at once, before they reach
Admiral Baldwin’s age.”

“Nay, Sir Walter,” cried Mrs Clay, “this is being severe indeed. Have a
little mercy on the poor men. We are not all born to be handsome. The
sea is no beautifier, certainly; sailors do grow old betimes; I have
observed it; they soon lose the look of youth. But then, is not it the
same with many other professions, perhaps most other? Soldiers, in
active service, are not at all better off: and even in the quieter
professions, there is a toil and a labour of the mind, if not of the
body, which seldom leaves a man’s looks to the natural effect of time.
The lawyer plods, quite care-worn; the physician is up at all hours,
and travelling in all weather; and even the clergyman—” she stopt a
moment to consider what might do for the clergyman;—“and even the
clergyman, you know is obliged to go into infected rooms, and expose
his health and looks to all the injury of a poisonous atmosphere. In
fact, as I have long been convinced, though every profession is
necessary and honourable in its turn, it is only the lot of those who
are not obliged to follow any, who can live in a regular way, in the
country, choosing their own hours, following their own pursuits, and
living on their own property, without the torment of trying for more;
it is only _their_ lot, I say, to hold the blessings of health and a
good appearance to the utmost: I know no other set of men but what lose
something of their personableness when they cease to be quite young.”
