Mrs. Kronborg believed that the size of every family was decided in
heaven. More modern views would not have startled her; they would
simply have seemed foolish—thin chatter, like the boasts of the men who
built the tower of Babel, or like Axel’s plan to breed ostriches in the
chicken yard. From what evidence Mrs. Kronborg formed her opinions on
this and other matters, it would have been difficult to say, but once
formed, they were unchangeable. She would no more have questioned her
convictions than she would have questioned revelation. Calm and even
tempered, naturally kind, she was capable of strong prejudices, and she
never forgave.

When the doctor came in to see Thea, Mrs. Kronborg was reflecting that
the washing was a week behind, and deciding what she had better do
about it. The arrival of a new baby meant a revision of her entire
domestic schedule, and as she drove her needle along she had been
working out new sleeping arrangements and cleaning days. The doctor had
entered the house without knocking, after making noise enough in the
hall to prepare his patients. Thea was reading, her book propped up
before her in the sunlight.

“Mustn’t do that; bad for your eyes,” he said, as Thea shut the book
quickly and slipped it under the covers.

Mrs. Kronborg called from her bed: “Bring the baby here, doctor, and
have that chair. She wanted him in there for company.”

Before the doctor picked up the baby, he put a yellow paper bag down on
Thea’s coverlid and winked at her. They had a code of winks and
grimaces. When he went in to chat with her mother, Thea opened the bag
cautiously, trying to keep it from crackling. She drew out a long bunch
of white grapes, with a little of the sawdust in which they had been
packed still clinging to them. They were called Malaga grapes in
Moonstone, and once or twice during the winter the leading grocer got a
keg of them. They were used mainly for table decoration, about
Christmas-time. Thea had never had more than one grape at a time
before. When the doctor came back she was holding the almost
transparent fruit up in the sunlight, feeling the pale-green skins
softly with the tips of her fingers. She did not thank him; she only
snapped her eyes at him in a special way which he understood, and, when
he gave her his hand, put it quickly and shyly under her cheek, as if
she were trying to do so without knowing it—and without his knowing it.

Dr. Archie sat down in the rocking-chair. “And how’s Thea feeling
to-day?”

He was quite as shy as his patient, especially when a third person
overheard his conversation. Big and handsome and superior to his fellow
townsmen as Dr. Archie was, he was seldom at his ease, and like Peter
Kronborg he often dodged behind a professional manner. There was
sometimes a contraction of embarrassment and self consciousness all
over his big body, which made him awkward—likely to stumble, to kick up
rugs, or to knock over chairs. If any one was very sick, he forgot
himself, but he had a clumsy touch in convalescent gossip.

Thea curled up on her side and looked at him with pleasure. “All right.
I like to be sick. I have more fun then than other times.”

“How’s that?”

“I don’t have to go to school, and I don’t have to practice. I can read
all I want to, and have good things,”—she patted the grapes. “I had
lots of fun that time I mashed my finger and you wouldn’t let Professor
Wunsch make me practice. Only I had to do left hand, even then. I think
that was mean.”

The doctor took her hand and examined the forefinger, where the nail
had grown back a little crooked. “You mustn’t trim it down close at the
corner there, and then it will grow straight. You won’t want it crooked
when you’re a big girl and wear rings and have sweethearts.”

She made a mocking little face at him and looked at his new scarf-pin.
“That’s the prettiest one you ev-ER had. I wish you’d stay a long while
and let me look at it. What is it?”

Dr. Archie laughed. “It’s an opal. Spanish Johnny brought it up for me
from Chihuahua in his shoe. I had it set in Denver, and I wore it
to-day for your benefit.”

Thea had a curious passion for jewelry. She wanted every shining stone
she saw, and in summer she was always going off into the sand hills to
hunt for crystals and agates and bits of pink chalcedony. She had two
cigar boxes full of stones that she had found or traded for, and she
imagined that they were of enormous value. She was always planning how
she would have them set.

“What are you reading?” The doctor reached under the covers and pulled
out a book of Byron’s poems. “Do you like this?”

She looked confused, turned over a few pages rapidly, and pointed to
“My native land, good-night.” “That,” she said sheepishly.

“How about ‘Maid of Athens’?”

She blushed and looked at him suspiciously. “I like ‘There was a sound
of revelry,’” she muttered.

The doctor laughed and closed the book. It was clumsily bound in padded
leather and had been presented to the Reverend Peter Kronborg by his
Sunday-School class as an ornament for his parlor table.

“Come into the office some day, and I’ll lend you a nice book. You can
skip the parts you don’t understand. You can read it in vacation.
Perhaps you’ll be able to understand all of it by then.”

Thea frowned and looked fretfully toward the piano. “In vacation I have
to practice four hours every day, and then there’ll be Thor to take
care of.” She pronounced it “Tor.”

“Thor? Oh, you’ve named the baby Thor?” exclaimed the doctor.

Thea frowned again, still more fiercely, and said quickly, “That’s a
nice name, only maybe it’s a little—old fashioned.” She was very
sensitive about being thought a foreigner, and was proud of the fact
that, in town, her father always preached in English; very bookish
English, at that, one might add.

Born in an old Scandinavian colony in Minnesota, Peter Kronborg had
been sent to a small divinity school in Indiana by the women of a
Swedish evangelical mission, who were convinced of his gifts and who
skimped and begged and gave church suppers to get the long, lazy youth
through the seminary. He could still speak enough Swedish to exhort and
to bury the members of his country church out at Copper Hole, and he
wielded in his Moonstone pulpit a somewhat pompous English vocabulary
he had learned out of books at college. He always spoke of “the infant
Saviour,” “our Heavenly Father,” etc. The poor man had no natural,
spontaneous human speech. If he had his sincere moments, they were
perforce inarticulate. Probably a good deal of his pretentiousness was
due to the fact that he habitually expressed himself in a book learned
language, wholly remote from anything personal, native, or homely. Mrs.
Kronborg spoke Swedish to her own sisters and to her sister-in-law
Tillie, and colloquial English to her neighbors. Thea, who had a rather
sensitive ear, until she went to school never spoke at all, except in
monosyllables, and her mother was convinced that she was tongue-tied.
She was still inept in speech for a child so intelligent. Her ideas
were usually clear, but she seldom attempted to explain them, even at
school, where she excelled in “written work” and never did more than
mutter a reply.

“Your music professor stopped me on the street to-day and asked me how
you were,” said the doctor, rising. “He’ll be sick himself, trotting
around in this slush with no overcoat or overshoes.”

“He’s poor,” said Thea simply.

The doctor sighed. “I’m afraid he’s worse than that. Is he always all
right when you take your lessons? Never acts as if he’d been drinking?”

Thea looked angry and spoke excitedly. “He knows a lot. More than
anybody. I don’t care if he does drink; he’s old and poor.” Her voice
shook a little.

Mrs. Kronborg spoke up from the next room. “He’s a good teacher,
doctor. It’s good for us he does drink. He’d never be in a little place
like this if he didn’t have some weakness. These women that teach music
around here don’t know nothing. I wouldn’t have my child wasting time
with them. If Professor Wunsch goes away, Thea’ll have nobody to take
from. He’s careful with his scholars; he don’t use bad language. Mrs.
Kohler is always present when Thea takes her lesson. It’s all right.”
Mrs. Kronborg spoke calmly and judicially. One could see that she had
thought the matter out before.

“I’m glad to hear that, Mrs. Kronborg. I wish we could get the old man
off his bottle and keep him tidy. Do you suppose if I gave you an old
overcoat you could get him to wear it?” The doctor went to the bedroom
door and Mrs. Kronborg looked up from her darning.

“Why, yes, I guess he’d be glad of it. He’ll take most anything from
me. He won’t buy clothes, but I guess he’d wear ’em if he had ’em. I’ve
never had any clothes to give him, having so many to make over for.”

“I’ll have Larry bring the coat around to-night. You aren’t cross with
me, Thea?” taking her hand.

Thea grinned warmly. “Not if you give Professor Wunsch a coat—and
things,” she tapped the grapes significantly. The doctor bent over and
kissed her.

III

Being sick was all very well, but Thea knew from experience that
starting back to school again was attended by depressing difficulties.
One Monday morning she got up early with Axel and Gunner, who shared
her wing room, and hurried into the back living-room, between the
dining-room and the kitchen. There, beside a soft-coal stove, the
younger children of the family undressed at night and dressed in the
morning. The older daughter, Anna, and the two big boys slept upstairs,
where the rooms were theoretically warmed by stovepipes from below. The
first (and the worst!) thing that confronted Thea was a suit of clean,
prickly red flannel, fresh from the wash. Usually the torment of
breaking in a clean suit of flannel came on Sunday, but yesterday, as
she was staying in the house, she had begged off. Their winter
underwear was a trial to all the children, but it was bitterest to Thea
because she happened to have the most sensitive skin. While she was
tugging it on, her Aunt Tillie brought in warm water from the boiler
and filled the tin pitcher. Thea washed her face, brushed and braided
her hair, and got into her blue cashmere dress. Over this she buttoned
a long apron, with sleeves, which would not be removed until she put on
her cloak to go to school. Gunner and Axel, on the soap box behind the
stove, had their usual quarrel about which should wear the tightest
stockings, but they exchanged reproaches in low tones, for they were
wholesomely afraid of Mrs. Kronborg’s rawhide whip. She did not
chastise her children often, but she did it thoroughly. Only a somewhat
stern system of discipline could have kept any degree of order and
quiet in that overcrowded house.

Mrs. Kronborg’s children were all trained to dress themselves at the
earliest possible age, to make their own beds,—the boys as well as the
girls,—to take care of their clothes, to eat what was given them, and
to keep out of the way. Mrs. Kronborg would have made a good chess
player; she had a head for moves and positions.

Anna, the elder daughter, was her mother’s lieutenant. All the children
knew that they must obey Anna, who was an obstinate contender for
proprieties and not always fair minded. To see the young Kronborgs
headed for Sunday School was like watching a military drill. Mrs.
Kronborg let her children’s minds alone. She did not pry into their
thoughts or nag them. She respected them as individuals, and outside of
the house they had a great deal of liberty. But their communal life was
definitely ordered.

In the winter the children breakfasted in the kitchen; Gus and Charley
and Anna first, while the younger children were dressing. Gus was
nineteen and was a clerk in a dry-goods store. Charley, eighteen months
younger, worked in a feed store. They left the house by the kitchen
door at seven o’clock, and then Anna helped her Aunt Tillie get the
breakfast for the younger ones. Without the help of this sister-in-law,
Tillie Kronborg, Mrs. Kronborg’s life would have been a hard one. Mrs.
Kronborg often reminded Anna that “no hired help would ever have taken
the same interest.”

Mr. Kronborg came of a poorer stock than his wife; from a lowly,
ignorant family that had lived in a poor part of Sweden. His
great-grandfather had gone to Norway to work as a farm laborer and had
married a Norwegian girl. This strain of Norwegian blood came out
somewhere in each generation of the Kronborgs. The intemperance of one
of Peter Kronborg’s uncles, and the religious mania of another, had
been alike charged to the Norwegian grandmother. Both Peter Kronborg
and his sister Tillie were more like the Norwegian root of the family
than like the Swedish, and this same Norwegian strain was strong in
Thea, though in her it took a very different character.

Tillie was a queer, addle-pated thing, as flighty as a girl at
thirty-five, and overweeningly fond of gay clothes—which taste, as Mrs.
Kronborg philosophically said, did nobody any harm. Tillie was always
cheerful, and her tongue was still for scarcely a minute during the
day. She had been cruelly overworked on her father’s Minnesota farm
when she was a young girl, and she had never been so happy as she was
now; had never before, as she said, had such social advantages. She
thought her brother the most important man in Moonstone. She never
missed a church service, and, much to the embarrassment of the
children, she always “spoke a piece” at the Sunday-School concerts. She
had a complete set of “Standard Recitations,” which she conned on
Sundays. This morning, when Thea and her two younger brothers sat down
to breakfast, Tillie was remonstrating with Gunner because he had not
learned a recitation assigned to him for George Washington Day at
school. The unmemorized text lay heavily on Gunner’s conscience as he
attacked his buckwheat cakes and sausage. He knew that Tillie was in
the right, and that “when the day came he would be ashamed of himself.”

“I don’t care,” he muttered, stirring his coffee; “they oughtn’t to
make boys speak. It’s all right for girls. They like to show off.”

“No showing off about it. Boys ought to like to speak up for their
country. And what was the use of your father buying you a new suit, if
you’re not going to take part in anything?”

“That was for Sunday-School. I’d rather wear my old one, anyhow. Why
didn’t they give the piece to Thea?” Gunner grumbled.

Tillie was turning buckwheat cakes at the griddle. “Thea can play and
sing, she don’t need to speak. But you’ve got to know how to do
something, Gunner, that you have. What are you going to do when you git
big and want to git into society, if you can’t do nothing? Everybody’ll
say, ‘Can you sing? Can you play? Can you speak? Then git right out of
society.’ An’ that’s what they’ll say to you, Mr. Gunner.”

Gunner and Alex grinned at Anna, who was preparing her mother’s
breakfast. They never made fun of Tillie, but they understood well
enough that there were subjects upon which her ideas were rather
foolish. When Tillie struck the shallows, Thea was usually prompt in
turning the conversation.

“Will you and Axel let me have your sled at recess?” she asked.

“All the time?” asked Gunner dubiously.

“I’ll work your examples for you to-night, if you do.”

“Oh, all right. There’ll be a lot of ’em.”

“I don’t mind, I can work ’em fast. How about yours, Axel?”

Axel was a fat little boy of seven, with pretty, lazy blue eyes. “I
don’t care,” he murmured, buttering his last buckwheat cake without
ambition; “too much trouble to copy ’em down. Jenny Smiley’ll let me
have hers.”

The boys were to pull Thea to school on their sled, as the snow was
deep. The three set off together. Anna was now in the high school, and
she no longer went with the family party, but walked to school with
some of the older girls who were her friends, and wore a hat, not a
hood like Thea.

IV

“And it was Summer, beautiful Summer!” Those were the closing words of
Thea’s favorite fairy tale, and she thought of them as she ran out into
the world one Saturday morning in May, her music book under her arm.
She was going to the Kohlers’ to take her lesson, but she was in no
hurry.

It was in the summer that one really lived. Then all the little
overcrowded houses were opened wide, and the wind blew through them
with sweet, earthy smells of garden-planting. The town looked as if it
had just been washed. People were out painting their fences. The
cottonwood trees were a-flicker with sticky, yellow little leaves, and
the feathery tamarisks were in pink bud. With the warm weather came
freedom for everybody. People were dug up, as it were. The very old
people, whom one had not seen all winter, came out and sunned
themselves in the yard. The double windows were taken off the houses,
the tormenting flannels in which children had been encased all winter
were put away in boxes, and the youngsters felt a pleasure in the cool
cotton things next their skin.
