After the candle had been lighted Mombi ordered him to build a fire in
the hearth, and while Tip was thus engaged the old woman ate her
supper. When the flames began to crackle the boy came to her and asked
a share of the bread and cheese; but Mombi refused him.

“I’m hungry!” said Tip, in a sulky tone.

“You won’t be hungry long,” replied Mombi, with a grim look.

The boy didn’t like this speech, for it sounded like a threat; but he
happened to remember he had nuts in his pocket, so he cracked some of
those and ate them while the woman rose, shook the crumbs from her
apron, and hung above the fire a small black kettle.

Then she measured out equal parts of milk and vinegar and poured them
into the kettle. Next she produced several packets of herbs and powders
and began adding a portion of each to the contents of the kettle.
Occasionally she would draw near the candle and read from a yellow
paper the recipe of the mess she was concocting.

As Tip watched her his uneasiness increased.

“What is that for?” he asked.

“For you,” returned Mombi, briefly.

Tip wriggled around upon his stool and stared awhile at the kettle,
which was beginning to bubble. Then he would glance at the stern and
wrinkled features of the witch and wish he were any place but in that
dim and smoky kitchen, where even the shadows cast by the candle upon
the wall were enough to give one the horrors. So an hour passed away,
during which the silence was only broken by the bubbling of the pot and
the hissing of the flames.

Finally, Tip spoke again.

“Have I got to drink that stuff?” he asked, nodding toward the pot.

“Yes,” said Mombi.

“What’ll it do to me?” asked Tip.

“If it’s properly made,” replied Mombi, “it will change or transform
you into a marble statue.”

Tip groaned, and wiped the perspiration from his forehead with his
sleeve.

“I don’t want to be a marble statue!” he protested.

[Illustration: image037]

“That doesn’t matter I want you to be one,” said the old woman, looking
at him severely.

“What use’ll I be then?” asked Tip. “There won’t be any one to work for
you.”

“I’ll make the Pumpkinhead work for me,” said Mombi.

Again Tip groaned.

“Why don’t you change me into a goat, or a chicken?” he asked,
anxiously. “You can’t do anything with a marble statue.”

“Oh, yes, I can,” returned Mombi. “I’m going to plant a flower garden,
next Spring, and I’ll put you in the middle of it, for an ornament. I
wonder I haven’t thought of that before; you’ve been a bother to me for
years.”

At this terrible speech Tip felt the beads of perspiration starting all
over his body, but he sat still and shivered and looked anxiously at
the kettle.

“Perhaps it won’t work,” he mutttered, in a voice that sounded weak and
discouraged.

“Oh, I think it will,” answered Mombi, cheerfully. “I seldom make a
mistake.”

Again there was a period of silence a silence so long and gloomy that
when Mombi finally lifted the kettle from the fire it was close to
midnight.

“You cannot drink it until it has become quite cold,” announced the old
witch for in spite of the law she had acknowledged practising
witchcraft. “We must both go to bed now, and at daybreak I will call
you and at once complete your transformation into a marble statue.”

With this she hobbled into her room, bearing the steaming kettle with
her, and Tip heard her close and lock the door.

The boy did not go to bed, as he had been commanded to do, but still
sat glaring at the embers of the dying fire.

[Illustration: image038]

[Illustration: image039]

The Flight of the Fugitives

Tip reflected.

“It’s a hard thing, to be a marble statue,” he thought, rebelliously,
“and I’m not going to stand it. For years I’ve been a bother to her,
she says; so she’s going to get rid of me. Well, there’s an easier way
than to become a statue. No boy could have any fun forever standing in
the middle of a flower garden! I’ll run away, that’s what I’ll do—and I
may as well go before she makes me drink that nasty stuff in the
kettle.” He waited until the snores of the old witch announced she was
fast asleep, and then he arose softly and went to the cupboard to find
something to eat.

“No use starting on a journey without food,” he decided, searching upon
the narrow shelves.

He found some crusts of bread; but he had to look into Mombi’s basket
to find the cheese she had brought from the village. While turning over
the contents of the basket he came upon the pepper-box which contained
the “Powder of Life.”

“I may as well take this with me,” he thought, “or Mombi’ll be using it
to make more mischief with.” So he put the box in his pocket, together
with the bread and cheese.

Then he cautiously left the house and latched the door behind him.
Outside both moon and stars shone brightly, and the night seemed
peaceful and inviting after the close and ill-smelling kitchen.

“I’ll be glad to get away,” said Tip, softly; “for I never did like
that old woman. I wonder how I ever came to live with her.”

He was walking slowly toward the road when a thought made him pause.

“I don’t like to leave Jack Pumpkinhead to the tender mercies of old
Mombi,” he muttered. “And Jack belongs to me, for I made him even if
the old witch did bring him to life.”

He retraced his steps to the cow-stable and opened the door of the
stall where the pumpkin-headed man had been left.

Jack was standing in the middle of the stall, and by the moonlight Tip
could see he was smiling just as jovially as ever.

“Come on!” said the boy, beckoning.

“Where to?” asked Jack.

“You’ll know as soon as I do,” answered Tip, smiling sympathetically
into the pumpkin face.

“All we’ve got to do now is to tramp.”

“Very well,” returned Jack, and walked awkwardly out of the stable and
into the moonlight.

Tip turned toward the road and the man followed him. Jack walked with a
sort of limp, and occasionally one of the joints of his legs would turn
backward, instead of frontwise, almost causing him to tumble. But the
Pumpkinhead was quick to notice this, and began to take more pains to
step carefully; so that he met with few accidents.

[Illustration: image041]

Tip led him along the path without stopping an instant. They could not
go very fast, but they walked steadily; and by the time the moon sank
away and the sun peeped over the hills they had travelled so great a
distance that the boy had no reason to fear pursuit from the old witch.
Moreover, he had turned first into one path, and then into another, so
that should anyone follow them it would prove very difficult to guess
which way they had gone, or where to seek them.

Fairly satisfied that he had escaped—for a time, at least—being turned
into a marble statue, the boy stopped his companion and seated himself
upon a rock by the roadside.

“Let’s have some breakfast,” he said.

Jack Pumpkinhead watched Tip curiously, but refused to join in the
repast. “I don’t seem to be made the same way you are,” he said.

“I know you are not,” returned Tip; “for I made you.”

“Oh! Did you?” asked Jack.

[Illustration: image043]

“Certainly. And put you together. And carved your eyes and nose and
ears and mouth,” said Tip proudly. “And dressed you.”

Jack looked at his body and limbs critically.

“It strikes me you made a very good job of it,” he remarked.

“Just so-so,” replied Tip, modestly; for he began to see certain
defects in the construction of his man. “If I’d known we were going to
travel together I might have been a little more particular.”

“Why, then,” said the Pumpkinhead, in a tone that expressed surprise,
“you must be my creator my parent my father!”

“Or your inventor,” replied the boy with a laugh. “Yes, my son; I
really believe I am!”

“Then I owe you obedience,” continued the man, “and you owe
me—support.”

“That’s it, exactly”, declared Tip, jumping up. “So let us be off.”

“Where are we going?” asked Jack, when they had resumed their journey.

“I’m not exactly sure,” said the boy; “but I believe we are headed
South, and that will bring us, sooner or later, to the Emerald City.”

“What city is that?” enquired the Pumpkinhead.

“Why, it’s the center of the Land of Oz, and the biggest town in all
the country. I’ve never been there, myself, but I’ve heard all about
its history. It was built by a mighty and wonderful Wizard named Oz,
and everything there is of a green color—just as everything in this
Country of the Gillikins is of a purple color.”

“Is everything here purple?” asked Jack.

“Of course it is. Can’t you see?” returned the boy.

“I believe I must be color-blind,” said the Pumpkinhead, after staring
about him.

“Well, the grass is purple, and the trees are purple, and the houses
and fences are purple,” explained Tip. “Even the mud in the roads is
purple. But in the Emerald City everything is green that is purple
here. And in the Country of the Munchkins, over at the East, everything
is blue; and in the South country of the Quadlings everything is red;
and in the West country of the Winkies, where the Tin Woodman rules,
everything is yellow.”

“Oh!” said Jack. Then, after a pause, he asked: “Did you say a Tin
Woodman rules the Winkies?”

“Yes; he was one of those who helped Dorothy to destroy the Wicked
Witch of the West, and the Winkies were so grateful that they invited
him to become their ruler,—just as the people of the Emerald City
invited the Scarecrow to rule them.”

“Dear me!” said Jack. “I’m getting confused with all this history. Who
is the Scarecrow?”

“Another friend of Dorothy’s,” replied Tip.

“And who is Dorothy?”

“She was a girl that came here from Kansas, a place in the big, outside
World. She got blown to the Land of Oz by a cyclone, and while she was
here the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman accompanied her on her travels.”

“And where is she now?” inquired the Pumpkinhead.

“Glinda the Good, who rules the Quadlings, sent her home again,” said
the boy.

“Oh. And what became of the Scarecrow?”

“I told you. He rules the Emerald City,” answered Tip.

“I thought you said it was ruled by a wonderful Wizard,” objected Jack,
seeming more and more confused.

“Well, so I did. Now, pay attention, and I’ll explain it,” said Tip,
speaking slowly and looking the smiling Pumpkinhead squarely in the
eye. “Dorothy went to the Emerald City to ask the Wizard to send her
back to Kansas; and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman went with her.
But the Wizard couldn’t send her back, because he wasn’t so much of a
Wizard as he might have been. And then they got angry at the Wizard,
and threatened to expose him; so the Wizard made a big balloon and
escaped in it, and no one has ever seen him since.”

“Now, that is very interesting history,” said Jack, well pleased; “and
I understand it perfectly all but the explanation.”

“I’m glad you do,” responded Tip. “After the Wizard was gone, the
people of the Emerald City made His Majesty, the Scarecrow, their King;
and I have heard that he became a very popular ruler.”

“Are we going to see this queer King?” asked Jack, with interest.

“I think we may as well,” replied the boy; “unless you have something
better to do.”

“Oh, no, dear father,” said the Pumpkinhead. “I am quite willing to go
wherever you please.”

[Illustration: image047]

[Illustration: image048]

[Illustration: image049]

Tip Makes an Experiment in Magic

The boy, small and rather delicate in appearance seemed somewhat
embarrassed at being called “father” by the tall, awkward,
pumpkinheaded man, but to deny the relationship would involve another
long and tedious explanation; so he changed the subject by asking,
abruptly:

“Are you tired?”

“Of course not!” replied the other. “But,” he continued, after a pause,
“it is quite certain I shall wear out my wooden joints if I keep on
walking.”

Tip reflected, as they journeyed on, that this was true. He began to
regret that he had not constructed the wooden limbs more carefully and
substantially. Yet how could he ever have guessed that the man he had
made merely to scare old Mombi with would be brought to life by means
of a magical powder contained in an old pepper-box?

So he ceased to reproach himself, and began to think how he might yet
remedy the deficiencies of Jack’s weak joints.

While thus engaged they came to the edge of a wood, and the boy sat
down to rest upon an old sawhorse that some woodcutter had left there.

“Why don’t you sit down?” he asked the Pumpkinhead.

“Won’t it strain my joints?” inquired the other.

“Of course not. It’ll rest them,” declared the boy.

So Jack tried to sit down; but as soon as he bent his joints farther
than usual they gave way altogether, and he came clattering to the
ground with such a crash that Tip feared he was entirely ruined.

[Illustration: image050]

He rushed to the man, lifted him to his feet, straightened his arms and
legs, and felt of his head to see if by chance it had become cracked.
But Jack seemed to be in pretty good shape, after all, and Tip said to
him:

“I guess you’d better remain standing, hereafter. It seems the safest
way.”

“Very well, dear father.” just as you say, replied the smiling Jack,
who had been in no wise confused by his tumble.

Tip sat down again. Presently the Pumpkinhead asked:

“What is that thing you are sitting on?”

“Oh, this is a horse,” replied the boy, carelessly.

“What is a horse?” demanded Jack.

“A horse? Why, there are two kinds of horses,” returned Tip, slightly
puzzled how to explain. “One kind of horse is alive, and has four legs
and a head and a tail. And people ride upon its back.”

“I understand,” said Jack, cheerfully “That’s the kind of horse you are
now sitting on.”

“No, it isn’t,” answered Tip, promptly.

“Why not? That one has four legs, and a head, and a tail.” Tip looked
at the saw-horse more carefully, and found that the Pumpkinhead was
right. The body had been formed from a tree-trunk, and a branch had
been left sticking up at one end that looked very much like a tail. In
the other end were two big knots that resembled eyes, and a place had
been chopped away that might easily be mistaken for the horse’s mouth.
As for the legs, they were four straight limbs cut from trees and stuck
fast into the body, being spread wide apart so that the saw-horse would
stand firmly when a log was laid across it to be sawed.

“This thing resembles a real horse more than I imagined,” said Tip,
trying to explain. “But a real horse is alive, and trots and prances
and eats oats, while this is nothing more than a dead horse, made of
wood, and used to saw logs upon.”

“If it were alive, wouldn’t it trot, and prance, and eat oats?”
inquired the Pumpkinhead.

“It would trot and prance, perhaps; but it wouldn’t eat oats,” replied
the boy, laughing at the idea. “And of course it can’t ever be alive,
because it is made of wood.”

“So am I,” answered the man.

Tip looked at him in surprise.

“Why, so you are!” he exclaimed. “And the magic powder that brought you
to life is here in my pocket.”

[Illustration: image053]

He brought out the pepper box, and eyed it curiously.

“I wonder,” said he, musingly, “if it would bring the saw-horse to
life.”

“If it would,” returned Jack, calmly for nothing seemed to surprise him
“I could ride on its back, and that would save my joints from wearing
out.”

“I’ll try it!” cried the boy, jumping up. “But I wonder if I can
remember the words old Mombi said, and the way she held her hands up.”

He thought it over for a minute, and as he had watched carefully from
the hedge every motion of the old witch, and listened to her words, he
believed he could repeat exactly what she had said and done.

So he began by sprinkling some of the magic Powder of Life from the
pepper-box upon the body of the saw-horse. Then he lifted his left
hand, with the little finger pointing upward, and said: “Weaugh!”

“What does that mean, dear father?” asked Jack, curiously.

“I don’t know,” answered Tip. Then he lifted his right hand, with the
thumb pointing upward and said: “Teaugh!”

“What’s that, dear father?” inquired Jack.

“It means you must keep quiet!” replied the boy, provoked at being
interrupted at so important a moment.

“How fast I am learning!” remarked the Pumpkinhead, with his eternal
smile.

Tip now lifted both hands above his head, with all the fingers and
thumbs spread out, and cried in a loud voice: “Peaugh!”

Immediately the saw-horse moved, stretched its legs, yawned with its
chopped-out mouth, and shook a few grains of the powder off its back.
The rest of the powder seemed to have vanished into the body of the
horse.

“Good!” called Jack, while the boy looked on in astonishment. “You are
a very clever sorcerer, dear father!”
