Aladdin had won the hearts of the people by his gentle bearing. He was
made captain of the Sultan’s armies, and won several battles for him,
but remained as courteous as before, and lived thus in peace and
content for several years.

But far away in Africa the magician remembered Aladdin, and by his
magic arts discovered that Aladdin, instead of perishing miserably in
the cave, had escaped, and had married a princess, with whom he was
living in great honour and wealth. He knew that the poor tailor’s son
could only have accomplished this by means of the lamp, and travelled
night and day till he reached the capital of China, bent on Aladdin’s
ruin. As he passed through the town he heard people talking everywhere
about a marvelous palace. “Forgive my ignorance,” he asked, “what is
the palace you speak of?” “Have you not heard of Prince Aladdin’s
palace,” was the reply, “the greatest wonder in the world? I will
direct you if you have a mind to see it.” The magician thanked him who
spoke, and having seen the palace knew that it had been raised by the
Genie of the Lamp, and became half mad with rage. He determined to get
hold of the lamp, and again plunge Aladdin into the deepest poverty.

Unluckily, Aladdin had gone a-hunting for eight days, which gave the
magician plenty of time. He bought a dozen lamps, put them into a
basket, and went to the palace, crying: “New lamps for old!” followed
by a jeering crowd. The Princess, sitting in the hall of
four-and-twenty windows, sent a slave to find out what the noise was
about, who came back laughing, so that the Princess scolded her.
“Madam,” replied the slave, “who can help laughing to see an old fool
offering to exchange fine new lamps for old ones?” Another slave,
hearing this, said, “There is an old one on the cornice there which he
can have.” Now this was the magic lamp, which Aladdin had left there,
as he could not take it out hunting with him. The Princess, not knowing
its value, laughingly bade the slave take it and make the exchange. She
went and said to the magician: “Give me a new lamp for this.” He
snatched it and bade the slave take her choice, amid the jeers of the
crowd. Little he cared, but left off crying his lamps, and went out of
the city gates to a lonely place, where he remained till nightfall,
when he pulled out the lamp and rubbed it. The genie appeared, and at
the magician’s command carried him, together with the palace and the
Princess in it, to a lonely place in Africa.

Next morning the Sultan looked out of the window towards Aladdin’s
palace and rubbed his eyes, for it was gone. He sent for the Vizier and
asked what had become of the palace. The Vizier looked out too, and was
lost in astonishment. He again put it down to enchantment, and this
time the Sultan believed him, and sent thirty men on horseback to fetch
Aladdin back in chains. They met him riding home, bound him, and forced
him to go with them on foot. The people, however, who loved him,
followed, armed, to see that he came to no harm. He was carried before
the Sultan, who ordered the executioner to cut off his head. The
executioner made Aladdin kneel down, bandaged his eyes, and raised his
scimitar to strike. At that instant the Vizier, who saw that the crowd
had forced their way into the courtyard and were scaling the walls to
rescue Aladdin, called to the executioner to stay his hand. The people,
indeed, looked so threatening that the Sultan gave way and ordered
Aladdin to be unbound, and pardoned him in the sight of the crowd.
Aladdin now begged to know what he had done. “False wretch!” said the
Sultan, “come hither,” and showed him from the window the place where
his palace had stood. Aladdin was so amazed he could not say a word.
“Where is your palace and my daughter?” demanded the Sultan. “For the
first I am not so deeply concerned, but my daughter I must have, and
you must find her or lose your head.” Aladdin begged for forty days in
which to find her, promising if he failed to return to suffer death at
the Sultan’s pleasure. His prayer was granted, and he went forth sadly
from the Sultan’s presence.

For three days he wandered about like a madman, asking everyone what
had become of his palace, but they only laughed and pitied him. He came
to the banks of a river, and knelt down to say his prayers before
throwing himself in. In doing so he rubbed the ring he still wore. The
genie he had seen in the cave appeared, and asked his will. “Save my
life, genie,” said Aladdin, “and bring my palace back.” “That is not in
my power,” said the genie; “I am only the Slave of the Ring; you must
ask him of the lamp.” “Even so,” said Aladdin, “but thou canst take me
to the palace, and set me down under my dear wife’s window.” He at once
found himself in Africa, under the window of the Princess, and fell
asleep out of sheer weariness.

He was awakened by the singing of the birds, and his heart was lighter.
He saw plainly that all his misfortunes were owning to the loss of the
lamp, and vainly wondered who had robbed him of it.

That morning the Princess rose earlier than she had done since she had
been carried into Africa by the magician, whose company she was forced
to endure once a day. She, however, treated him so harshly that he
dared not live there altogether. As she was dressing, one of her women
looked out and saw Aladdin. The Princess ran and opened the window, and
at the noise she made, Aladdin looked up. She called to him to come to
her, and great was the joy of these lovers at seeing each other again.
After he had kissed her Aladdin said: “I beg of you, Princess, in God’s
name, before we speak of anything else, for your own sake and mine,
tell me what has become of an old lamp I left on the cornice in the
hall of four-and-twenty windows when I went a-hunting.” “Alas,” she
said, “I am the innocent cause of our sorrows,” and told him of the
exchange of the lamp. “Now I know,” cried Aladdin, “that we have to
thank the African magician for this! Where is the lamp?” “He carries it
about with him,” said the Princess. “I know, for he pulled it out of
his breast to show me. He wishes me to break my faith with you and
marry him, saying that you were beheaded by my father’s command. He is
forever speaking ill of you, but I only reply by my tears. If I
persist, I doubt not but he will use violence.” Aladdin comforted her,
and left her for a while. He changed clothes with the first person he
met in the town, and having bought a certain powder returned to the
Princess, who let him in by a little side door. “Put on your most
beautiful dress,” he said to her, “and receive the magician with
smiles, leading him to believe that you have forgotten me. Invite him
to sup with you, and say you wish to taste the wine of his country. He
will go for some, and while he is gone I will tell you what to do.” She
listened carefully to Aladdin and when he left her, arrayed herself
gaily for the first time since she left China. She put on a girdle and
head-dress of diamonds and seeing in a glass that she was more
beautiful than ever, received the magician, saying, to his great
amazement: “I have made up my mind that Aladdin is dead, and that all
my tears will not bring him back to me, so I am resolved to mourn no
more, and have therefore invited you to sup with me; but I am tired of
the wines of China, and would fain taste those of Africa.” The magician
flew to his cellar, and the Princess put the powder Aladdin had given
her in her cup. When he returned she asked him to drink her health in
the wine of Africa, handing him her cup in exchange for his, as a sign
she was reconciled to him. Before drinking the magician made her a
speech in praise of her beauty, but the Princess cut him short, saying:
“Let us drink first, and you shall say what you will afterwards.” She
set her cup to her lips and kept it there, while the magician drained
his to the dregs and fell back lifeless. The Princess then opened the
door to Aladdin, and flung her arms around his neck; but Aladdin went
to the dead magician, took the lamp out of his vest, and bade the genie
carry the palace and all in it back to China. This was done, and the
Princess in her chamber felt only two little shocks, and little thought
she was home again.

The Sultan, who was sitting in his closet, mourning for his lost
daughter, happened to look up, and rubbed his eyes, for there stood the
palace as before! He hastened thither, and Aladdin received him in the
hall of the four-and-twenty windows, with the Princess at his side.
Aladdin told him what had happened, and showed him the dead body of the
magician, that he might believe. A ten days’ feast was proclaimed, and
it seemed as if Aladdin might now live the rest of his life in peace;
but it was not meant to be.

The African magician had a younger brother, who was, if possible, more
wicked and more cunning than himself. He travelled to China to avenge
his brother’s death, and went to visit a pious woman called Fatima,
thinking she might be of use to him. He entered her cell and clapped a
dagger to her breast, telling her to rise and do his bidding on pain of
death. He changed clothes with her, coloured his face like hers, put on
her veil, and murdered her, that she might tell no tales. Then he went
towards the palace of Aladdin, and all the people, thinking he was the
holy woman, gathered round him, kissing his hands and begging his
blessing. When he got to the palace there was such a noise going on
round him that the Princess bade her slave look out the window and ask
what was the matter. The slave said it was the holy woman, curing
people by her touch of their ailments, whereupon the Princess, who had
long desired to see Fatima, sent for her. On coming to the Princess the
magician offered up a prayer for her health and prosperity. When he had
done the Princess made him sit by her, and begged him to stay with her
always. The false Fatima, who wished for nothing better, consented, but
kept his veil down for fear of discovery. The princess showed him the
hall, and asked him what he thought of it. “It is truly beautiful,”
said the false Fatima. “In my mind it wants but one thing.” “And what
is that?” said the Princess. “If only a roc’s egg,” replied he, “were
hung up from the middle of this dome, it would be the wonder of the
world.”

After this the Princess could think of nothing but the roc’s egg, and
when Aladdin returned from hunting he found her in a very ill humour.
He begged to know what was amiss, and she told him that all her
pleasure in the hall was spoilt for want of a roc’s egg hanging from
the dome. “If that is all,” replied Aladdin, “you shall soon be happy.”
He left her and rubbed the lamp, and when the genie appeared commanded
him to bring a roc’s egg. The genie gave such a loud and terrible
shriek that the hall shook.

“Wretch!” he cried, “is it not enough that I have done everything for
you, but you must command me to bring my master and hang him up in the
midst of this dome? You and your wife and your palace deserve to be
burnt to ashes, but that this request does not come from you, but from
the brother of the African magician, whom you destroyed. He is now in
your palace disguised as the holy woman, whom he murdered. He it was
who put that wish into your wife’s head. Take care of yourself, for he
means to kill you.” So saying, the genie disappeared.

Aladdin went back to the Princess, saying his head ached, and
requesting that the holy Fatima should be fetched to lay her hands on
it. But when the magician came near, Aladdin, seizing his dagger,
pierced him to the heart. “What have you done?” cried the Princess.
“You have killed the holy woman!” “Not so,” replied Aladdin, “but a
wicked magician,” and told her of how she had been deceived.

After this Aladdin and his wife lived in peace. He succeeded the Sultan
when he died, and reigned for many years, leaving behind him a long
line of kings.
