Aladdin and the Magic Lamp

There once lived a poor tailor, who had a son called Aladdin, a
careless, idle boy who would do nothing but play all day long in the
streets with little idle boys like himself. This so grieved the father
that he died; yet, in spite of his mother’s tears and prayers, Aladdin
did not mend his ways. One day, when he was playing in the streets as
usual, a stranger asked him his age, and if he was not the son of
Mustapha the tailor. “I am, sir,” replied Aladdin; “but he died a long
while ago.” On this the stranger, who was a famous African magician,
fell on his neck and kissed him saying: “I am your uncle, and knew you
from your likeness to my brother. Go to your mother and tell her I am
coming.” Aladdin ran home and told his mother of his newly found uncle.
“Indeed, child,” she said, “your father had a brother, but I always
thought he was dead.” However, she prepared supper, and bade Aladdin
seek his uncle, who came laden with wine and fruit. He fell down and
kissed the place where Mustapha used to sit, bidding Aladdin’s mother
not to be surprised at not having seen him before, as he had been forty
years out of the country. He then turned to Aladdin, and asked him his
trade, at which the boy hung his head, while his mother burst into
tears. On learning that Aladdin was idle and would learn no trade, he
offered to take a shop for him and stock it with merchandise. Next day
he bought Aladdin a fine suit of clothes and took him all over the
city, showing him the sights, and brought him home at nightfall to his
mother, who was overjoyed to see her son so fine.

Next day the magician led Aladdin into some beautiful gardens a long
way outside the city gates. They sat down by a fountain and the
magician pulled a cake from his girdle, which he divided between them.
Then they journeyed onwards till they almost reached the mountains.
Aladdin was so tired that he begged to go back, but the magician
beguiled him with pleasant stories and lead him on in spite of himself.
At last they came to two mountains divided by a narrow valley. “We will
go no farther,” said his uncle. “I will show you something wonderful;
only do you gather up sticks while I kindle a fire.” When it was lit
the magician threw on it a powder he had about him, at the same time
saying some magical words. The earth trembled a little in front of
them, disclosing a square flat stone with a brass ring in the middle to
raise it by. Aladdin tried to run away, but the magician caught him and
gave him a blow that knocked him down. “What have I done, uncle?” he
said piteously; whereupon the magician said more kindly: “Fear nothing,
but obey me. Beneath this stone lies a treasure which is to be yours,
and no one else may touch it, so you must do exactly as I tell you.” At
the word treasure Aladdin forgot his fears, and grasped the ring as he
was told, saying the names of his father and grandfather. The stone
came up quite easily, and some steps appeared. “Go down,” said the
magician; “at the foot of those steps you will find an open door
leading into three large halls. Tuck up your gown and go through them
without touching anything, or you will die instantly. These halls lead
into a garden of fine fruit trees. Walk on till you come to niche in a
terrace where stands a lighted lamp. Pour out the oil it contains, and
bring it me.” He drew a ring from his finger and gave it to Aladdin,
bidding him prosper.

Aladdin found everything as the magician had said, gathered some fruit
off the trees, and, having got the lamp, arrived at the mouth of the
cave. The magician cried out in a great hurry: “Make haste and give me
the lamp.” This Aladdin refused to do until he was out of the cave. The
magician flew into a terrible passion, and throwing some more powder on
to the fire, he said something, and the stone rolled back into its
place.

The man left the country, which plainly showed that he was no uncle of
Aladdin’s but a cunning magician, who had read in his magic books of a
wonderful lamp, which would make him the most powerful man in the
world. Though he alone knew where to find it, he could only receive it
from the hand of another. He had picked out the foolish Aladdin for
this purpose, intending to get the lamp and kill him afterwards.

For two days Aladdin remained in the dark, crying and lamenting. At
last he clasped his hands in prayer, and in so doing rubbed the ring,
which the magician had forgotten to take from him. Immediately an
enormous and frightful genie rose out of the earth, saying: “What
wouldst thou with me? I am the Slave of the Ring, and will obey thee in
all things.” Aladdin fearlessly replied, “Deliver me from this place!”
whereupon the earth opened, and he found himself outside. As soon as
his eyes could bear the light he went home, but fainted on the
threshold. When he came to himself he told his mother what had passed,
and showed her the lamp and the fruits he had gathered in the garden,
which were in reality precious stones. He then asked for some food.
“Alas! child,” she said, “I have nothing in the house, but I have spun
a little cotton and will go sell it.” Aladdin bade her keep her cotton,
for he would sell the lamp instead. As it was very dirty, she began to
rub it, that it might fetch a higher price. Instantly a hideous genie
appeared, and asked what she would have. She fainted away, but Aladdin,
snatching the lamp, said boldly: “Fetch me something to eat!” The genie
returned with a silver bowl, twelve silver plates containing rich
meats, two silver cups, and two bottles of wine. Aladdin’s mother, when
she came to herself, said: “Whence comes this splendid feast?” “Ask
not, but eat,” replied Aladdin. So they sat at breakfast till it was
dinner-time, and Aladdin told his mother about the lamp. She begged him
to sell it, and have nothing to do with devils. “No,” said Aladdin,
“since chance hath made us aware of its virtues, we will use it, and
the ring likewise, which I shall always wear on my finger.” When they
had eaten all the genie had brought, Aladdin sold one of the silver
plates, and so on until none were left. He then had recourse to the
genie, who gave him another set of plates, and thus they lived many
years.

One day Aladdin heard an order from the Sultan proclaimed that everyone
was to stay at home and close his shutters while the Princess his
daughter went to and from the bath. Aladdin was seized by a desire to
see her face, which was very difficult, as she always went veiled. He
hid himself behind the door of the bath, and peeped through a chink.
The Princess lifted her veil as she went in, and looked so beautiful
that Aladdin fell in love with her at first sight. He went home so
changed that his mother was frightened. He told her he loved the
Princess so deeply he could not live without her, and meant to ask her
in marriage of her father. His mother, on hearing this, burst out
laughing, but Aladdin at last prevailed upon her to go before the
Sultan and carry his request. She fetched a napkin and laid in it the
magic fruits from the enchanted garden, which sparkled and shone like
the most beautiful jewels. She took these with her to please the
Sultan, and set out, trusting in the lamp. The Grand Vizier and the
lords of council had just gone in as she entered the hall and placed
herself in front of the Sultan. He, however, took no notice of her. She
went every day for a week, and stood in the same place. When the
council broke up on the sixth day the Sultan said to his Vizier: “I see
a certain woman in the audience-chamber every day carrying something in
a napkin. Call her next time, that I may find out what she wants.” Next
day, at a sign from the vizier, she went up to the foot of the throne
and remained kneeling until the Sultan said to her: “Rise, good woman,
and tell me what you want.” She hesitated, so the Sultan sent away all
but the Vizier, and bade her speak freely, promising to forgive her
beforehand for anything she might say. She then told him of her son’s
violent love for the Princess. “I prayed him to forget her,” she said,
“but in vain; he threatened to do some desperate deed if I refused to
go and ask your Majesty for the hand of the Princess. Now I pray you to
forgive not me alone, but my son Aladdin.” The Sultan asked her kindly
what she had in the napkin, whereupon she unfolded the jewels and
presented them. He was thunderstruck, and turning to the vizier, said:
“What sayest thou? Ought I not to bestow the Princess on one who values
her at such a price?” The Vizier, who wanted her for his own son,
begged the Sultan to withhold her for three months, in the course of
which he hoped his son could contrive to make him a richer present. The
Sultan granted this, and told Aladdin’s mother that, though he
consented to the marriage, she must not appear before him again for
three months.

Aladdin waited patiently for nearly three months, but after two had
elapsed, his mother, going into the city to buy oil, found everyone
rejoicing, and asked what was going on. “Do you not know,” was the
answer, “that the son of the Grand Vizier is to marry the Sultan’s
daughter tonight?” Breathless she ran and told Aladdin, who was
overwhelmed at first, but presently bethought him of the lamp. He
rubbed it and the genie appeared, saying: “What is thy will?” Aladdin
replied: “The Sultan, as thou knowest, has broken his promise to me,
and the vizier’s son is to have the Princess. My command is that
to-night you bring hither the bride and bridegroom.” “Master, I obey,”
said the genie. Aladdin then went to his chamber, where, sure enough,
at midnight the genie transported the bed containing the vizier’s son
and the Princess. “Take this new-married man,” he said, “and put him
outside in the cold, and return at daybreak.” Whereupon the genie took
the vizier’s son out of bed, leaving Aladdin with the Princess. “Fear
nothing,” Aladdin said to her; “you are my wife, promised to me by your
unjust father, and no harm will come to you.” The Princess was too
frightened to speak, and passed the most miserable night of her life,
while Aladdin lay down beside her and slept soundly. At the appointed
hour the genie fetched in the shivering bridegroom, laid him in his
place, and transported the bed back to the palace.

Presently the Sultan came to wish his daughter good-morning. The
unhappy Vizier’s son jumped up and hid himself, while the Princess
would not say a word and was very sorrowful. The Sultan sent her mother
to her, who said: “How comes it, child, that you will not speak to your
father? What has happened?” The Princess sighed deeply, and at last
told her mother how, during the night, the bed had been carried into
some strange house, and what had passed there. Her mother did not
believe her in the least, but bade her rise and consider it an idle
dream.

The following night exactly the same thing happened, and next morning,
on the Princess’s refusing to speak, the Sultan threatened to cut off
her head. She then confessed all, bidding him ask the Vizier’s son if
it were not so. The Sultan told the Vizier to ask his son, who owned
the truth, adding that, dearly as he loved the Princess, he had rather
die than go through another such fearful night, and wished to be
separated from her. His wish was granted, and there was an end of
feasting and rejoicing.

When the three months were over, Aladdin sent his mother to remind the
Sultan of his promise. She stood in the same place as before, and the
Sultan, who had forgotten Aladdin, at once remembered him, and sent for
her. On seeing her poverty the Sultan felt less inclined than ever to
keep his word, and asked his Vizier’s advice, who counselled him to set
so high a value on the Princess that no man living would come up to it.
The Sultan than turned to Aladdin’s mother, saying: “Good woman, a
sultan must remember his promises, and I will remember mine, but your
son must first send me forty basins of gold brimful of jewels, carried
by forty black slaves, led by as many white ones, splendidly dressed.
Tell him that I await his answer.” The mother of Aladdin bowed low and
went home, thinking all was lost. She gave Aladdin the message adding,
“He may wait long enough for your answer!” “Not so long, mother, as you
think,” her son replied. “I would do a great deal more than that for
the Princess.” He summoned the genie, and in a few moments the eighty
slaves arrived, and filled up the small house and garden. Aladdin made
them to set out to the palace, two by two, followed by his mother. They
were so richly dressed, with such splendid jewels, that everyone
crowded to see them and the basins of gold they carried on their heads.
They entered the palace, and, after kneeling before the Sultan, stood
in a half-circle round the throne with their arms crossed, while
Aladdin’s mother presented them to the Sultan. He hesitated no longer,
but said: “Good woman, return and tell your son that I wait for him
with open arms.” She lost no time in telling Aladdin, bidding him make
haste. But Aladdin first called the genie. “I want a scented bath,” he
said, “a richly embroidered habit, a horse surpassing the Sultan’s, and
twenty slaves to attend me. Besides this, six slaves, beautifully
dressed, to wait on my mother; and lastly, ten thousand pieces of gold
in ten purses.” No sooner said then done. Aladdin mounted his horse and
passed through the streets, the slaves strewing gold as they went.
Those who had played with him in his childhood knew him not, he had
grown so handsome. When the sultan saw him he came down from his
throne, embraced him, and led him into a hall where a feast was spread,
intending to marry him to the Princess that very day. But Aladdin
refused, saying, “I must build a palace fit for her,” and took his
leave. Once home, he said to the genie: “Build me a palace of the
finest marble, set with jasper, agate, and other precious stones. In
the middle you shall build me a large hall with a dome, its four walls
of massy gold and silver, each side having six windows, whose lattices,
all except one which is to be left unfinished, must be set with
diamonds and rubies. There must be stables and horses and grooms and
slaves; go and see about it!”

The palace was finished the next day, and the genie carried him there
and showed him all his orders faithfully carried out, even to the
laying of a velvet carpet from Aladdin’s palace to the Sultan’s.
Aladdin’s mother then dressed herself carefully, and walked to the
palace with her slaves, while he followed her on horseback. The Sultan
sent musicians with trumpets and cymbals to meet them, so that the air
resounded with music and cheers. She was taken to the Princess, who
saluted her and treated her with great honour. At night the princess
said good-bye to her father, and set out on the carpet for Aladdin’s
palace, with his mother at her side, and followed by the hundred
slaves. She was charmed at the sight of Aladdin, who ran to receive
her. “Princess,” he said, “blame your beauty for my boldness if I have
displeased you.” She told him that, having seen him, she willingly
obeyed her father in this matter. After the wedding had taken place,
Aladdin led her into the hall, where a feast was spread, and she supped
with him, after which they danced till midnight.

Next day Aladdin invited the Sultan to see the palace. On entering the
hall with the four-and-twenty windows with their rubies, diamonds and
emeralds, he cried, “It is a world’s wonder! There is only one thing
that surprises me. Was it by accident that one window was left
unfinished?” “No, sir, by design,” returned Aladdin. “I wished your
Majesty to have the glory of finishing this palace.” The Sultan was
pleased, and sent for the best jewelers in the city. He showed them the
unfinished window, and bade them fit it up like the others. “Sir,”
replied their spokesman, “we cannot find jewels enough.” The Sultan had
his own fetched, which they soon used, but to no purpose, for in a
month’s time the work was not half done. Aladdin knowing that their
task was vain, bade them undo their work and carry the jewels back, and
the genie finished the window at his command. The Sultan was surprised
to receive his jewels again, and visited Aladdin, who showed him the
window finished. The Sultan embraced him, the envious vizier meanwhile
hinting that it was the work of enchantment.
