First, they demoralize the people who are engaged in the activity.
Judge Forer quits, and Ms. Dewey in completely disheartened.
And second, they demoralize the activity itself.
The very practice is demoralized, and the practitioners are demoralized.
It creates people -- when you manipulate incentives to get people to do the right thing -- it creates people who are addicted to incentives.
That is to say, it creates people who only do things for incentives.
Now the striking thing about this is that psychologists have known this for 30 years.
Psychologists have known about the negative consequences of incentivizing everything for 30 years.
We know that if you reward kids for drawing pictures, they stop caring about the drawing and care only about the reward.
If you reward kids for reading books, they stop caring about what's in the books and only care about how long they are.
If you reward teachers for kids' test scores, they stop caring about educating and only care about test preparation.
If you were to reward doctors for doing more procedures -- which is the current system -- they would do more.
If instead you reward doctors for doing fewer procedures, they will do fewer.
What we want, of course, is doctors who do just the right amount of procedures and do the right amount for the right reason -- namely, to serve the welfare of their patients.
Psychologists have known this for decades, and it's time for policymakers to start paying attention and listen to psychologists a little bit, instead of economists.
And it doesn't have to be this way.
We think, Ken and I, that there are real sources of hope.
We identify one set of people in all of these practices who we call canny outlaws.
These are people who, being forced to operate in a system that demands rule-following and creates incentives, find away around the rules, find a way to subvert the rules.
So there are teachers who have these scripts to follow, and they know that if they follow these scripts, the kids will learn nothing.
And so what they do is they follow the scripts, but they follow the scripts at double-time and squirrel away little bits of extra time during which they teach in the way that they actually know is effective.
So these are little ordinary, everyday heroes, and they're incredibly admirable, but there's no way that they can sustain this kind of activity in the face of a system that either roots them out or grinds them down.
So canny outlaws are better than nothing, but it's hard to imagine any canny outlaw sustaining that for an indefinite period of time.
More hopeful are people we call system-changers.
These are people who are looking not to dodge the system's rules and regulations, but to transform the system, and we talk about several.
One in particular is a judge named Robert Russell.
And one day he was faced with the case of Gary Pettengill.
Pettengill was a 23-year-old vet who had planned to make the army a career, but then he got a severe back injury in Iraq, and that forced him to take a medical discharge.
He was married, he had a third kid on the way, he suffered from PTSD, in addition to the bad back, and recurrent nightmares, and he had started using marijuana to ease some of the symptoms.
He was only able to get part-time work because of his back, and so he was unable to earn enough to put food on the table and take care of his family.
So he started selling marijuana.
He was busted in a drug sweep.
His family was kicked out of their apartment, and the welfare system was threatening to take away his kids.
Under normal sentencing procedures, Judge Russell would have had little choice but to sentence Pettengill to serious jail-time as a drug felon.
But Judge Russell did have an alternative.
And that's because he was in a special court.
He was in a court called the Veterans' Court.
In the Veterans' Court -- this was the first of its kind in the United States.
Judge Russell created the Veterans' Court.
It was a court only for veterans who had broken the law.
And he had created it exactly because mandatory sentencing laws were taking the judgment out of judging.
No one wanted non-violent offenders -- and especially non-violent offenders who were veterans to boot -- to be thrown into prison.
They wanted to do something about what we all know, namely the revolving door of the criminal justice system.
And what the Veterans' Court did, was it treated each criminal as an individual, tried to get inside their problems, tried to fashion responses to their crimes that helped them to rehabilitate themselves, and didn't forget about them once the judgment was made.
Stayed with them, followed up on them, made sure that they were sticking to whatever plan had been jointly developed to get them over the hump.
There are now 22 cities that have Veterans' Courts like this.
Why has the idea spread?
Well, one reason is that Judge Russell has now seen 108 vets in his Veterans' Court as of February of this year, and out of 108, guess how many have gone back through the revolving door of justice into prison.
None.
None.
Anyone would glom onto a criminal justice system that has this kind of a record.
So here's is a system-changer, and it seems to be catching.
There's a banker who created a for-profit community bank that encouraged bankers -- I know this is hard to believe -- encouraged bankers who worked there to do well by doing good for their low-income clients.
The bank helped finance the rebuilding of what was otherwise a dying community.
Though their loan recipients were high-risk by ordinary standards, the default rate was extremely low.
The bank was profitable.
The bankers stayed with their loan recipients.
They didn't make loans and then sell the loans.
They serviced the loans.
They made sure that their loan recipients were staying up with their payments.
Banking hasn't always been the way we read about it now in the newspapers.
Even Goldman Sachs once used to serve clients, before it turned into an institution that serves only itself.
Banking wasn't always this way, and it doesn't have to be this way.
So there are examples like this in medicine -- doctors at Harvard who are trying to transform medical education, so that you don't get a kind of ethical erosion and loss of empathy, which characterizes most medical students in the course of their medical training.
And the way they do it is to give third-year medical students patients who they follow for an entire year.
So the patients are not organ systems, and they're not diseases; they're people, people with lives.
And in order to be an effective doctor, you need to treat people who have lives and not just disease.
In addition to which there's an enormous amount of back and forth, mentoring of one student by another, of all the students by the doctors, and the result is a generation -- we hope -- of doctors who do have time for the people they treat.
We'll see.
So there are lots of examples like this that we talk about.
Each of them shows that it is possible to build on and nurture character and keep a profession true to its proper mission -- what Aristotle would have called its proper telos.
And Ken and I believe that this is what practitioners actually want.
People want to be allowed to be virtuous.
They want to have permission to do the right thing.
They don't want to feel like they need to take a shower to get the moral grime off their bodies everyday when they come home from work.
Aristotle thought that practical wisdom was the key to happiness, and he was right.
There's now a lot of research being done in psychology on what makes people happy, and the two things that jump out in study after study -- I know this will come as a shock to all of you -- the two things that matter most to happiness are love and work.
Love: managing successfully relations with the people who are close to you and with the communities of which you are a part.
Work: engaging in activities that are meaningful and satisfying.
If you have that, good close relations with other people, work that's meaningful and fulfilling, you don't much need anything else.
Well, to love well and to work well, you need wisdom.
Rules and incentives don't tell you how to be a good friend, how to be a good parent, how to be a good spouse, or how to be a good doctor or a good lawyer or a good teacher.
Rules and incentives are no substitutes for wisdom.
Indeed, we argue, there is no substitute for wisdom.
And so practical wisdom does not require heroic acts of self-sacrifice on the part of practitioners.
In giving us the will and the skill to do the right thing -- to do right by others -- practical wisdom also gives us the will and the skill to do right by ourselves.
Thanks.
(Applause)
Have you ever wondered why extremism seems to have been on the rise in Muslim-majority countries over the course of the last decade?
Have you ever wondered how such a situation can be turned around?
Have you ever looked at the Arab uprisings and thought, "How could we have predicted that?"
or "How could we have better prepared for that?"
Well my personal story, my personal journey, what brings me to the TED stage here today, is a demonstration of exactly what's been happening in Muslim-majority countries over the course of the last decades, at least, and beyond.
I want to share some of that story with you, but also some of my ideas around change and the role of social movements in creating change in Muslim-majority societies.
So let me begin by first of all giving a very, very brief history of time, if I may indulge.
In medieval societies there were defined allegiances.
An identity was defined primarily by religion.
And then we moved on into an era in the 19th century with the rise of a European nation-state where identities and allegiances were defined by ethnicity.
So identity was primarily defined by ethnicity, and the nation-state reflected that.
In the age of globalization, we moved on.
I call it the era of citizenship -- where people could be from multi-racial, multi-ethnic backgrounds, but all be equal as citizens in a state.
You could be American-Italian; you could be American-Irish; you could be British-Pakistani.
But I believe now that we're moving into a new age, and that age The New York Times dubbed recently as "the age of behavior."
How I define the age of behavior is a period of transnational allegiances, where identity is defined more so by ideas and narratives.
And these ideas and narratives that bump people across borders are increasingly beginning to affect the way in which people behave.
Now this is not all necessarily good news, because it's also my belief that hatred has gone global just as much as love.
But actually it's my belief that the people who've been truly capitalizing on this age of behavior, up until now, up until recent times, up until the last six months, the people who have been capitalizing most on the age of behavior and the transnational allegiances, using digital activism and other sorts of borderless technologies, those who've been benefiting from this have been extremists.
And that's something which I'd like to elaborate on.
If we look at Islamists, if we look at the phenomenon of far-right fascists, one thing they've been very good at, one thing that they've actually been exceeding in, is communicating across borders, using technologies to organize themselves, to propagate their message and to create truly global phenomena.
Now I should know, because for 13 years of my life, I was involved in an extreme Islamist organization.
And I was actually a potent force in spreading ideas across borders, and I witnessed the rise of Islamist extremism as distinct from Islam the faith, and the way in which it influenced my co-religionists across the world.
And my story, my personal story, is truly evidence for the age of behavior that I'm attempting to elaborate upon here.
I was, by the way -- I'm an Essex lad, born and raised in Essex in the U.K.
Anyone who's from England knows the reputation we have from Essex.
But having been born in Essex, at the age of 16, I joined an organization.
At the age of 17, I was recruiting people from Cambridge University to this organization.
At the age of 19, I was on the national leadership of this organization in the U.K.
At the age of 21, I was co-founding this organization in Pakistan.
At the age of 22, I was co-founding this organization in Denmark.
By the age of 24, I found myself convicted in prison in Egypt, being blacklisted from three countries in the world for attempting to overthrow their governments, being subjected to torture in Egyptian jails and sentenced to five years as a prisoner of conscience.
Now that journey, and what took me from Essex all the way across the world -- by the way, we were laughing at democratic activists.
We felt they were from the age of yesteryear.
We felt that they were out of date.
I learned how to use email from the extremist organization that I used.
I learned how to effectively communicate across borders without being detected.
Eventually I was detected, of course, in Egypt.
But the way in which I learned to use technology to my advantage was because I was within an extremist organization that was forced to think beyond the confines of the nation-state.
The age of behavior: where ideas and narratives were increasingly defining behavior and identity and allegiances.
So as I said, we looked to the status quo and ridiculed it.
And it's not just Islamist extremists that did this.
But even if you look across the mood music in Europe of late, far-right fascism is also on the rise.
A form of anti-Islam rhetoric is also on the rise and it's transnational.
And the consequences that this is having is that it's affecting the political climate across Europe.
What's actually happening is that what were previously localized parochialisms, individual or groupings of extremists who were isolated from one another, have become interconnected in a globalized way and have thus become, or are becoming, mainstream.
Because the Internet and connection technologies are connecting them across the world.
If you look at the rise of far-right fascism across Europe of late, you will see some things that are happening that are influencing domestic politics, yet the phenomenon is transnational.
In certain countries, mosque minarets are being banned.
In others, headscarves are being banned.
In others, kosher and halal meat are being banned, as we speak.
And on the flip side, we have transnational Islamist extremists doing the same thing across their own societies.
And so they are pockets of parochialism that are being connected in a way that makes them feel like they are mainstream.
Now that never would have been possible before.
They would have felt isolated, until these sorts of technologies came around and connected them in a way that made them feel part of a larger phenomenon.
Where does that leave democracy aspirants?
Well I believe they're getting left far behind.
And I'll give you an example here at this stage.
If any of you remembers the Christmas Day bomb plot: there's a man called Anwar al-Awlaki.
As an American citizen, ethnically a Yemeni, in hiding currently in Yemen, who inspired a Nigerian, son of the head of Nigeria's national bank.
This Nigerian student studied in London, trained in Yemen, boarded a flight in Amsterdam to attack America.
In the meanwhile, the Old mentality with a capital O, was represented by his father, the head of the Nigerian bank, warning the CIA that his own son was about to attack, and this warning fell on deaf ears.
The Old mentality with a capital O, as represented by the nation-state, not yet fully into the age of behavior, not recognizing the power of transnational social movements, got left behind.
And the Christmas Day bomber almost succeeded in attacking the United States of America.
Again with the example of the far right: that we find, ironically, xenophobic nationalists are utilizing the benefits of globalization.
So why are they succeeding?
And why are democracy aspirants falling behind?
Well we need to understand the power of the social movements who understand this.
And a social movement is comprised, in my view, it's comprised of four main characteristics.
It's comprised of ideas and narratives and symbols and leaders.
I'll talk you through one example, and that's the example that everyone here will be aware of, and that's the example of Al-Qaeda.
If I asked you to think of the ideas of Al-Qaeda, that's something that comes to your mind immediately.
If I ask you to think of their narratives -- the West being at war with Islam, the need to defend Islam against the West -- these narratives, they come to your mind immediately.
Incidentally, the difference between ideas and narratives: the idea is the cause that one believes in; and the narrative is the way to sell that cause -- the propaganda, if you like, of the cause.
So the ideas and the narratives of Al-Qaeda come to your mind immediately.
If I ask you to think of their symbols and their leaders, they come to your mind immediately.
One of their leaders was killed in Pakistan recently.
So these symbols and these leaders come to your mind immediately.
And that's the power of social movements.
They're transnational, and they bond around these ideas and narratives and these symbols and these leaders.
However, if I ask your minds to focus currently on Pakistan, and I ask you to think of the symbols and the leaders for democracy in Pakistan today, you'll be hard pressed to think beyond perhaps the assassination of Benazir Bhutto.
Which means, by definition, that particular leader no longer exists.
One of the problems we're facing is, in my view, that there are no globalized, youth-led, grassroots social movements advocating for democratic culture across Muslim-majority societies.
There is no equivalent of the Al-Qaeda, without the terrorism, for democracy across Muslim-majority societies.
There are no ideas and narratives and leaders and symbols advocating the democratic culture on the ground.
So that begs the next question.
Why is it that extremist organizations, whether of the far-right or of the Islamist extremism -- Islamism meaning those who wish to impose one version of Islam over the rest of society -- why is it that they are succeeding in organizing in a globalized way, whereas those who aspire to democratic culture are falling behind?
And I believe that's for four reasons.
I believe, number one, it's complacency.
Because those who aspire to democratic culture are in power, or have societies that are leading globalized, powerful societies, powerful countries.
And that level of complacency means they don't feel the need to advocate for that culture.
The second, I believe, is political correctness.
That we have a hesitation in espousing the universality of democratic culture because we are associating that -- we associate believing in the universality of our values -- with extremists.
Yet actually, whenever we talk about human rights, we do say that human rights are universal.
But actually going out to propagate that view is associated with either neoconservativism or with Islamist extremism.
To go around saying that I believe democratic culture is the best that we've arrived at as a form of political organizing is associated with extremism.
And the third, democratic choice in Muslim-majority societies has been relegated to a political choice, meaning political parties in many of these societies ask people to vote for them as the democratic party, but then the other parties ask them to vote for them as the military party -- wanting to rule by military dictatorship.
And then you have a third party saying, "Vote for us; we'll establish a theocracy."
So democracy has become merely one political choice among many other forms of political choices available in those societies.
And what happens as a result of this is, when those parties are elected, and inevitably they fail, or inevitably they make political mistakes, democracy takes the blame for their political mistakes.
And then people say, "We've tried democracy.
It doesn't really work.
Let's bring the military back again."

