When I was 10 years old, my father lay on the living room floor in the grips of one of his many depressions.
As I crouched next to him, he told me that he wanted to kill himself.
My father lived, but he struggled to work.
And my family survived, but we teetered, down one paycheck, relying on my mom's schoolteacher salary.
Even as a little kid, I knew we lived in the shadow of financial and emotional collapse.
This is really hard to say, because it's taken me 25 years to be honest with myself that this is why I do this work: knowing that my father needed health care to recover, but to be healthy, my family needed something else, we needed a decent income; and knowing, as so many do more than I, that panic when the basics threaten to slip away.
To the voters in our focus groups, the solutions were straightforward.
As one of those white Republican women in Charlotte said, "Instead of putting all this money into health care, put it into affordable housing.
You know, like, take it and distribute it differently."
It turns out that when you have the right language and you ask the right questions, the answers become remarkably clear and unanimous.
What we know is that, despite all the noise, the plan for health care in this country is that there is no plan.
But we have something more powerful than any politician's bill, any candidate's platform, any think tank's policy statement.
We have our common sense and our common experience.
So I ask, if you are a health care executive: Do you know how many of your patients run out of food or struggle to pay the rent at the end of the month?
Is that data on your scorecard, shaping your business and your bonuses?
If you are a politician: Will you continue to fight on the scorched earth of health care, or will you act on what your voters, what Democratic and Republican voters alike, already know, which is that good wages, healthy food and safe housing are health?
And for the rest of us, for the citizens of this country: Will we demand accountability to what we know to be true, which is that our common sense, our common experience, makes us the experts in what it takes to be healthy?
This moment, as it turns out, is not about changing minds.
It is about something more powerful.
It is about changing the questions we ask and quieting the noise to hear each other's answers.
It is about the radical possibility that we the patients, we the physicians, we the caregivers, we the health care executives and yes, even we the people, that we agree.
And it is now time -- in fact, long overdue -- for us to marshal the courage to hear those answers and to act upon them.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Cancer.
It's a devastating disease that takes an enormous emotional toll.
Not only on the patient, but the patient's loved ones, as well.
It is a battle that the human race has been fighting for centuries.
And while we've made some advancements, we still haven't beaten it.
Two out of five people in the US will develop cancer in their lifetime.
Of those, 90 percent will succumb to the disease due to metastases.
Metastasis is a spread of cancer from a primary site to a distal site, through the circulatory or the lymphatic system.
For instance, a female patient with breast cancer doesn't succumb to the disease simply because she has a mass on her breast.
She succumbs to the disease because it spreads to the lungs, liver, lymph nodes, brain, bone, where it becomes unresectable or untreatable.
Metastasis is a complicated process.
One that I've studied for several years now.
And something that my team and I discovered recently was that cancer cells are able to communicate with each other and coordinate their movement, based on how closely packed they are in the tumor microenvironment.
They communicate with each other through two signaling molecules called Interleukin-6 and Interleukin-8.
Now, like anything else in nature, when things get a little too tight, the signal is enhanced, causing the cancer cells to move away faster from the primary site and spread to a new site.
So, if we block this signal, using a drug cocktail that we developed, we can stop the communication between cancer cells and slow down the spread of cancer.
Let me pause here for a second and take you back to when this all began for me in 2010, when I was just a sophomore in college.
I had just started working in Dr Danny Wirtz's lab at Johns Hopkins University.
And I'll be honest: I was a young, naive, Sri Lankan girl, (Laughter) who had no previous research experience.
And I was tasked to look at how cancer cells move in a 3D collagen I matrix that recapsulated, in a dish, the conditions that cancer cells are exposed to in our bodies.
This was new and exciting for me, because previous work had been done on 2D, flat, plastic dishes that really weren't representative of what the cancer cells are exposed to in our bodies.
Because, let's face it, the cancer cells in our bodies aren't stuck onto plastic dishes.
It was during this time that I attended a seminar conducted by Dr Bonnie Bassler from Princeton University, where she talked about how bacteria cells communicate with each other, based on their population density, and perform a specific action.
It was at this moment that a light bulb went off in my head, and I thought, "Wow, I see this in my cancer cells every day, when it comes to their movement."
The idea for my project was thus born.
I hypothesized that cancer cells are able to communicate with each other and coordinate their movement, based on how closely packed they are in the tumor microenvironment.
I became obsessed with pursuing this hypothesis.
And fortunately, I work for someone who is open to running with my crazy ideas.
So, I threw myself into this project.
However, I couldn't do it by myself.
I needed help.
I definitely needed help.
So we recruited undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and professors from different institutions and multiple disciplines to come together and work on this idea that I conceived as a sophomore in college.
After years of conducting experiments together and merging different ideas and perspectives, we discovered a new signaling pathway that controls how cancer cells communicate with each other and move, based on their cell density.
Some of you might have heard this, because most of social media knows it as the Hasini effect.
(Laughter) (Applause) And we weren't done yet.
We then decided that we wanted to block this signaling pathway and see if we could slow down the spread of cancer.
Which we did, in preclinical animal models.
We came up with a drug cocktail consisting of tocilizumab, which is currently used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, and reparixin, which is currently in clinical trials against breast cancer.
And interestingly, what we found was that this cocktail of drugs really had no effect on tumor growth, but directly targeted metastases.
This was a significant finding, because currently, there aren't any FDA-approved therapeutics that directly target the spread of cancer.
In fact, the spread of cancer, metastasis, is thought of as a byproduct of tumor growth.
Where the idea is, if we can stop the tumor from growing, we can stop the tumor from spreading.
However, most of us know that this is not true.
We, on the other hand, came up with the drug cocktail that targets metastasis not by targeting tumor growth, but by targeting the complex mechanisms that govern it, through the targeting of the Hasini effect.
(Laughter) This work was recently published in "Nature Communications," and my team and I received an overwhelming response from around the world.
Nobody on my team could have predicted this sort of response.
We seem to have struck a nerve.
Looking back, I am extremely grateful for the positive response that I received, not only from academia, but also patients, and people around the world affected by this terrible disease.
As I reflect on this success I've encountered with the Hasini effect, I keep coming back to the people that I was fortunate enough to work with.
The undergraduate students who demonstrated superhuman powers through their hard work and dedication.
The graduate students and the postdoctoral fellows, my fellow Avengers, who taught me new techniques and always made sure I stayed on track.
The professors, my Yodas and my Obi-Wan Kenobis, who brought their expertise into making this work into what it is today.
The support staff, the friends and family, people who lifted our spirits, and never let us give up on our ambitious endeavors.
The best kind of sidekicks we could have asked for.
It took a village to help me study metastasis.
And believe me, without my village, I wouldn't be here.
Today, our team has grown, and we are using the Hasini effect to develop combination therapies that will effectively target tumor growth and metastases.
We are engineering new anticancer therapeutics, to limit toxicity and to reduce drug resistance.
And we are developing groundbreaking systems that will help for the development of better human clinical trials.
It blows my mind to think that all this, the incredible work that I'm pursuing -- and the fact that I'm standing here, talking to you today -- all came from this tiny idea that I had when I was sitting at the back of a seminar when I was just 20 years old.
I recognize that right now, I am on this incredible journey that allows me to pursue work that I am extremely passionate about, and something that feeds my curiosity on a daily basis.
But I have to say, my favorite part of all of this -- other than, of course, being here, talking to you, today -- is the fact that I get to work with a diverse group of people, who make my work stronger, better and just so much more fun.
And because of this, I have to say that collaboration is my favorite superhuman power.
And what I love about this power is that it's not unique to me.
It's within all of us.
My work shows that even cancer cells use collaboration to invade our bodies and spread their wrath.
For us humans, it is a superpower that has produced incredible discoveries in the medical and scientific field.
And it is the superpower that we can all turn to to inspire us to create something bigger than ourselves, that will help make the world a better place.
Collaboration is the superpower that I turn to, to help me fight cancer.
And I am confident that with the right collaborations, we will beat this terrible disease.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Priya Vulchi: Four years ago, we really thought we understood racism.
Just like many of you here today, we had experienced and heard stories about race, about prejudice, discrimination and stereotyping and we were like, "We get it, racism, we got it, we got it."
But we weren't even close.
Winona Guo: So we decided that we had to listen and learn more.
We talked to as many random people as we could and collected hundreds of personal stories about race, stories that revealed how racial injustice is a nationwide epidemic that we ourselves spread and now can't seem to recognize or get rid of.
PV: We're not there yet.
Today, we are here to raise our standards of racial literacy, to redefine what it means to be racially literate.
WG: We want everywhere across the United States for our youngest and future generations to grow up equipped with the tools to understand, navigate and improve a world structured by racial division.
We want us all to imagine the community as a place where we not only feel proud of our own backgrounds, but can also invest in others' experiences as if they were our own.
PV: We just graduated from high school this past June.
WG: And you'd think -- (Applause) And you'd think after 12 years somebody in or out of the classroom would have helped us understand -- PV: At a basic level at least -- WG: The society we live in.
PV: The truth for almost all our classmates is that they don't.
WG: In communities around our country, so many of which are racially divided, PV: If you don't go searching for an education about race, for racial literacy -- WG: You won't get it.
It won't just come to you.
PV: Even when we did have conversations about race, our understanding was always superficial.
We realized that there are two big gaps in our racial literacy.
WG: First, the heart gap: an inability to understand each of our experiences, to fiercely and unapologetically be compassionate beyond lip service.
PV: And second, the mind gap: an inability to understand the larger, systemic ways in which racism operates.
WG: First, the heart gap.
To be fair, race did pop up a few times in school, growing up.
We all defend our social justice education because we learned about Martin Luther King Jr.
and Harriet Tubman and Rosa Parks.
But even in all of those conversations, race always felt outdated, like, "Yes, slavery, that happened once upon a time, but why does it really matter now?"
As a result, we didn't really care.
But what if our teacher introduced a story from the present day, for example, how Treniya told us in Pittsburgh that -- PV: "My sister was scrolling through Facebook and typed in our last name.
This white guy popped up, and we found out that his great-great-grandfather owned slaves and my great-great- great-grandmother was one of them.
My last name -- it's not who I am.
We've been living under a white man's name.
If slavery didn't happen, who would I even be?"
WG: Now it feels relevant, immediate, because the connection to slavery's lasting legacy today is made clear, right?
Or what would happen is our teacher would throw out these cold statistics.
You've probably seen this one before in news headlines.
PV: African-Americans are incarcerated more than five times the rate of white people.
WG: Now consider Ronnie, in Seattle.
PV: "My father means everything to me.
He's all I've got, I don't know my mother.
My father's currently being wrongly incarcerated for 12 years.
I've got a daughter, and I try to be that same fatherly figure for her: always involved in everything she does, it might even be annoying at some points.
But I'm afraid I'll go missing in her life just like my father did in mine."
WG: Throwing out just the statistic, just the facts alone, disconnected from real humans, can lead to dangerously incomplete understanding of those facts.
It fails to recognize that for many people who don't understand racism the problem is not a lack of knowledge to talk about the pain of white supremacy and oppression, it's that they don't recognize that that pain exists at all.
They don't recognize the human beings that are being affected, and they don't feel enough to care.
PV: Second, the mind gap.
We can't ignore the stats, either.
We can't truly grasp Ronnie's situation without understanding how things like unjust laws and biased policing systematic racism has created the disproportionate incarceration rates over time.
Or like how in Honolulu, the large prison population of native Hawaiians like Kimmy is heavily influenced by the island's long history with US colonialization, its impact passing down through generations to today.
For us, sometimes we would talk about people's personal, unique experiences in the classroom.
Stuff like, how Justin once told us -- WG: "I've been working on psychologically reclaiming my place in this city.
Because for me, my Chicago isn't the nice architecture downtown, it's not the North Side.
My Chicago is the orange line, the pink line, the working immigrant class going on the train."
PV: And while we might have acknowledged his personal experience, we wouldn't have talked about how redlining and the legalized segregation of our past created the racially divided neighborhoods we live in today.
We wouldn't have completely understood how racism is embedded in the framework of everything around us, because we would stay narrowly focused on people's isolated experiences.
Another example, Sandra in DC once told us: WG: "When I'm with my Korean family, I know how to move with them.
I know what to do in order to have them feel like I care about them.
And making and sharing food is one of the most fundamental ways of showing love.
When I'm with my partner who's not Korean, however, we've had to grapple with the fact that I'm very food-centric and he's just not.
One time he said that he didn't want to be expected to make food for me, and I got really upset."
PV: That might seem like a weird reaction, but only if we don't recognize how it's emblematic of something larger, something deeper.
Intragenerational trauma.
How in Sandra's family, widespread hunger and poverty existed as recently as Sandra's parents' generation and therefore impacts Sandra today.
She experiences someone saying -- WG: "I don't want to feed you."
PV: As -- WG: "I don't want to hug you."
PV: And without her and her partner having that nuanced understanding of her reaction and the historical context behind it, it could easily lead to unnecessary fighting.
That's why it's so important that we proactively -- (Both speaking): Co-create -- PV: A shared American culture that identifies and embraces the different values and norms within our diverse communities.
WG: To be racially literate -- PV: To understand who we are so that we can heal together -- WG: We cannot neglect the heart -- PV: Or the mind.
So, with our hundreds of stories, we decided to publish a racial literacy textbook to bridge that gap between our hearts and minds.
WG: Our last book, "The Classroom Index," shares deeply personal stories.
PV: And pairs those personal stories to the brilliant research of statisticians and scholars.
WG: Every day, we are still blown away by people's experiences, by the complexity of our collective racial reality.
PV: So today, we ask you -- WG: Are you racially literate?
Are you there yet?
PV: Do you really understand the people around you, their stories, stories like these?
It's not just knowing that Louise from Seattle survived Japanese American internment camps.
It's knowing that, meanwhile, her husband was one of an estimated 33,000 Japanese Americans who fought for our country during the war, a country that was simultaneously interning their families.
For most of us, those Japanese Americans both in camps and in service, now see their bravery, their resilience, their history forgotten.
They've become only victims.
PV: It's not just knowing that interracial marriages like Shermaine and Paul in DC exist, it's acknowledging that our society has been programmed for them to fail.
That on their very first date someone shouted, "Why are you with that black whore?"
That according to a Columbia study on cis straight relationships black is often equated with masculinity and Asian with femininity, leading more men to not value black women and to fetishize Asian women.
Among black-white marriages in the year 2000, 73 percent had a black husband and a white wife.
Paul and Shermaine defy that statistic.
Black is beautiful, but it takes a lot to believe so once society says otherwise.
WG: It's not just knowing that white people like Lisa in Chicago have white privilege, it's reflecting consciously on the term whiteness and its history, knowing that whiteness can't be equated with American.
It's knowing that Lisa can't forget her own personal family's history of Jewish oppression.
That she can't forget how, growing up, she was called a dirty Jew with horns and tails.
But Lisa knows she can pass as white so she benefits from huge systemic and interpersonal privileges, and so she spends every day grappling with ways that she can leverage that white privilege for social justice.
For example, starting conversations with other people of privilege about race.
Or shifting the power in her classroom to her students by learning to listen to their experiences of racism and poverty.
PV: It's not just knowing that native languages are dying.
It's appreciating how fluency in the Cherokee language, which really only less than 12,000 people speak today, is an act of survival, of preservation of culture and history.
It's knowing how the nongendered Cherokee language enabled Ahyoka's acceptance as a trans woman in Tahlequah, Oklahoma.

