Everybody has an opinion.
There's great feedback.
And the numbers are used to make decisions.
If you go over the education spending and the health care spending -- particularly these long-term trends -- you don't have that type of involvement on a number that's more important in terms of equity, in terms of learning.
So what do we need to do?
We need better tools.
We can get some things out on the Internet.
I'm going to use my website to put up some things that will give the basic picture.
We need lots more.
There's a few good books, one about school spending and where the money comes from -- how that's changed over time, and the challenge.
We need better accounting.
We need to take the fact that the current employees, the future liabilities they create, that should come out of the current budget.
We need to understand why they've done the pension accounting the way they have.
It should be more like private accounting.
It's the gold standard.
And finally, we need to really reward politicians.
Whenever they say there's these long-term problems, we can't say, "Oh, you're the messenger with bad news?
We just shot you."
In fact, there are some like these: Erskine Bowles, Alan Simpson and others, who have gone through and given proposals for this overall federal health-spending state-level problem.
But in fact, their work was sort of pushed off.
In fact, the week afterwards, some tax cuts were done that made the situation even worse than their assumptions.
So we need these pieces.
Now I think this is a solvable problem.
It's a great country with lots of people.
But we have to draw those people in, because this is about education.
And just look at what happened with the tuitions with the University of California and project that out for another three, four, five years -- it's unaffordable.
And that's the kind of thing -- the investment in the young -- that makes us great, allows us to contribute.
It allows us to do the art, the biotechnology, the software and all those magic things.
And so the bottom line is we need to care about state budgets because they're critical for our kids and our future.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) (Singing) I was walking down the line, trying to find some peace of mind.
Then I saw you.
You were takin' it slow and walkin' it one step at a time.
I said, "Listen, stranger, I'm feeling low now.
I don't know which way to go."
I said, "If you're lost now, maybe I could help you along and sing you a song, and move you on and on and on."
Singing down the line.
Where shall we go?
Where shall we go?
She said, "I'm looking for a kind of shelter.
A place for me to call my own.
I've been walking all night long, but I don't know where to call my home."
"The only way to find that place is close to where my heart is.
I know I'm gonna get there, but I've got to keep on walking down the line."
Down the line.
Down the line.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) How's everybody feeling today?
You feeling good?
(Cheers) Fantastic.
Would everybody mind singing with me for just one second?
Could you sing something?
Could you sing a D?
Sing "Ooh."
(Audience hums) Oh -- louder for me, louder for me.
(Singing) Oh.
Now, please, if you could sing, "Oh oh oh."
Audience: Oh oh oh.
Jacob Collier: Whoa oh oh.
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
JC: Sing, "Whoa oh."
Audience: Whoa oh.
JC: Oh oh oh.
Audience: Oh oh oh.
JC: Sing, "Whoa oh oh."
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
JC: Sing, "Whoa oh oh."
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
JC: Whoa oh oh.
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
JC: Sing, "Whoa oh oh."
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
Thank you so much.
That's beautiful.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
So do you feel that motion?
Do you feel yourself as part of that motion, things moving underneath the surface?
So the language of musical harmony is an absolutely extraordinary one.
It's a way of navigating one's emotional frameworks, but without the need to put things into words, and I think that, as with many other languages, it doesn't matter how much you know about a language.
It doesn't matter how many words you can say, how many phrases you know.
What matters is the emotional choices you make with this language.
So I encourage us to embrace this idea as a community, which is the thing which in time may grow us towards as opposed to away from our own humanity.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) (Music) (Singing) Take me anywhere you want to go.
You know that my love is strong.
In my hideaway.
Softly, like the calm that follows storms, Find what I've been searching for all along.
In my hideaway.
Even when I close my eyes, darling, if you've gone astray, I'm on my way to my hideaway.
Touch me like I've never loved before, in the place that I adore, in my hideaway.
I know whichever way the wind may blow, there will be a place for me to go in my hideaway.
My hideaway.
Sticks and stones I won't hide from you no more.
And in time I find what I've been searching for.
Heard your voice calling out to me.
I'm on my way to where I can be free.
And if she won't wait for me, do it right, don't look back, keep my heart on the future.
On the soles of my shoes all the places I've been that I've known since I knew her.
'Cause it's you, don't you know that you're making me guess that you're the one for me.
That it's you that I guess that I wanted to know all along.
Girl, it's you that I want, that makes me complete, cause you're the one for me.
It's thanks to you that I guess that I want you to know I belong.
One, two, three, four, five.
(Applause) Thank you so much.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Thanks so much.
Thank you guys.
Kelly Stoetzel: OK, Jacob.
Wow.
OK, we have some questions.
JC: OK.
KS: That was spectacular.
JC: Thank you, Kelly.
Thank you.
KS: Those visualizations we just saw, those were happening in real time, yeah?
JC: Yeah, so everything visual takes cues from things which are audial, or something, if that's a word, and so everything is real time.
I cue the loops, I play the instruments and then the tree, for example, that you saw grow, grows in such a way that it takes low long notes and grows thick long branches, and it takes high, quiet notes, whatever, and then it grows thin, small branches.
And then my singing voice sort of blows wind against the tree.
KS: So you're 22 years old.
JC: Yes, indeed.
Moderator: You played all of that by yourself.
How did you get started and how did this all evolve?
JC: I have this magical room in my house in North London, which is, like, over there.
(Cheers) Thank you.
Represent North London.
And this room -- I mean, this is my family home.
I grew up in this room filled with musical instruments, but most importantly, I had a family who encouraged me to invest in my own imagination, and so things I created, things I built were good things to be building just because I was making them, and I think that's such an important idea.
But this room was my paradise, essentially, and when I came to tour my album, which is called "In My Room," I thought I'd try and tour the room on the road, and that's quite a strange idea, but it's something that I've been working on for a couple of years, and it's quite exciting to be inside the circle.
KS: So this is really like the setup in your room, here.
JC: It kind of is.
It's similar to the room in the sense that I can generate things on the spot and I can be spontaneous, which is what I think both music and all of the best ideas are all about.
KS: So you won two Grammys for a record that you made in your room by yourself.
And how is that even possible?
We couldn't have done that, that couldn't have happened five years ago even.
JC: It's a brand new world.
The power is now in the hands of the creator, as I'm sure you guys would agree, as opposed to the big record company executive or the big man or something like that.
It's somebody with a good idea.
Here I am at TED saying this to you guys who know this already, but it's somebody with a good idea who can sow that seed.
That's the person who carries the torch into the world.
And yeah, I made this album completely on my own and I didn't wait for somebody to say, "Hey Jacob, you should make an album on your own."
I just went ahead and made it and I didn't mind what people thought, and two Grammys is a massive bonus.
(Applause) KS: Thank you so much, Jacob.
JC: Thanks, Kelly.
Thanks so much.
(Applause)
The 2011 Arab Spring captured the attention of the world.
It also captured the attention of authoritarian governments in other countries, who were worried that revolution would spread.
To respond, they ramped up surveillance of activists, journalists and dissidents who they feared would inspire revolution in their own countries.
One prominent Bahraini activist, who was arrested and tortured by his government, has said that the interrogators showed him transcripts of his telephone calls and text messages.
Of course, it's no secret that governments are able to intercept telephone calls and text messages.
It's for that reason that many activists specifically avoid using the telephone.
Instead, they use tools like Skype, which they think are immune to interception.
They're wrong.
There have now been over the last few years an industry of companies who provide surveillance technology to governments, specifically technology that allows those governments to hack into the computers of surveillance targets.
Rather than intercepting the communications as they go over the wire, instead they now hack into your computer, enable your webcam, enable your microphone, and steal documents from your computer.
When the government of Egypt fell in 2011, activists raided the office of the secret police, and among the many documents they found was this document by the Gamma Corporation, by Gamma International.
Gamma is a German company that manufactures surveillance software and sells it only to governments.
It's important to note that most governments don't really have the in-house capabilities to develop this software.
Smaller ones don't have the resources or the expertise, and so there's this market of Western companies who are happy to supply them with the tools and techniques for a price.
Gamma is just one of these companies.
I should note also that Gamma never actually sold their software to the Egyptian government.
They'd sent them an invoice for a sale, but the Egyptians never bought it.
Instead, apparently, the Egyptian government used a free demo version of Gamma's software.
(Laughter) So this screenshot is from a sales video that Gamma produced.
Really, they're just emphasizing in a relatively slick presentation the fact that the police can sort of sit in an air-conditioned office and remotely monitor someone without them having any idea that it's going on.
You know, your webcam light won't turn on.
There's nothing to indicate that the microphone is enabled.
This is the managing director of Gamma International.
His name is Martin Muench.
There are many photos of Mr. Muench that exist.
This is perhaps my favorite.
I'm just going to zoom in a little bit onto his webcam.
You can see there's a little sticker that's placed over his camera.
He knows what kind of surveillance is possible, and so clearly he doesn't want it to be used against him.
Muench has said that he intends for his software to be used to capture terrorists and locate pedophiles.
Of course, he's also acknowledged that once the software has been sold to governments, he has no way of knowing how it can be used.
Gamma's software has been located on servers in countries around the world, many with really atrocious track records and human rights violations.
They really are selling their software around the world.
Gamma is not the only company in the business.
As I said, it's a $5 billion industry.
One of the other big guys in the industry is an Italian company called Hacking Team.
Now, Hacking Team has what is probably the slickest presentation.
The video they've produced is very sexy, and so I'm going to play you a clip just so you can get a feel both for the capabilities of the software but also how it's marketed to their government clients.
(Video) Narrator: You want to look through your target's eyes.
(Music) You have to hack your target.
You have to hit many different platforms.
You have to overcome encryption and capture relevant data.
Being stealth and untraceable.
Deployed all over your country.
Exactly what we do.
Christopher Soghoian: So, it would be funny if it wasn't true, but, in fact, Hacking Team's software is being sold to governments around the world.
Last year we learned, for example, that it's been used to target Moroccan journalists by the Moroccan government.
Many, many countries it's been found in.
So, Hacking Team has also been actively courting the U.S. law enforcement market.
In the last year or so, the company has opened a sales office in Maryland.
The company has also hired a spokesperson.
They've been attending surveillance industry conferences where law enforcement officials show up.
They've spoken at the conferences.
What I thought was most fascinating was they've actually paid for the coffee break at one of the law enforcement conferences earlier this year.
I can't tell you for sure that Hacking Team has sold their technology in the United States, but what I can tell you that if they haven't sold it, it isn't because they haven't been trying hard.
So as I said before, governments that don't really have the resources to build their own tools will buy off-the-shelf surveillance software, and so for that reason, you see that the government of, say, Tunisia, might use the same software as the government of Germany.
They're all buying off-the-shelf stuff.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation in the United States does have the budget to build their own surveillance technology, and so for several years, I've been trying to figure out if and how the FBI is hacking into the computers of surveillance targets.
My friends at an organization called the Electronic Frontier Foundation -- they're a civil society group — obtained hundreds of documents from the FBI detailing their next generation of surveillance technologies.
Most of these documents were heavily redacted, but what you can see from the slides, if I zoom in, is this term: Remote Operations Unit.
Now, when I first looked into this, I'd never heard of this unit before.
I've been studying surveillance for more than six years.
I'd never heard of it.
And so I went online and I did some research, and ultimately I hit the mother lode when I went to LinkedIn, the social networking site for job seekers.
There were lots of former U.S. government contractors who had at one point worked for the Remote Operating Unit, and were describing in surprising detail on their CVs what they had done in their former job.
(Laughter) So I took this information and I gave it to a journalist that I know and trust at the Wall Street Journal, and she was able to contact several other former law enforcement officials who spoke on background and confirmed that yes, in fact, the FBI has a dedicated team that does nothing but hack into the computers of surveillance targets.
Like Gamma and Hacking Team, the FBI also has the capability to remotely activate webcams, microphones, steal documents, get web browsing information, the works.
There's sort of a big problem with governments going into hacking, and that's that terrorists, pedophiles, drug dealers, journalists and human rights activists all use the same kinds of computers.
There's no drug dealer phone and there's no journalist laptop.
We all use the same technology, and what that means then is that for governments to have the capability to hack into the computers of the real bad guys, they also have to have the capability to hack into our devices too.
So governments around the world have been embracing this technology.
They've been embracing hacking as a law enforcement technique, but without any real debate.
In the United States, where I live, there have been no congressional hearings.
There's no law that's been passed specifically authorizing this technique, and because of its power and potential for abuse, it's vital that we have an informed public debate.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The idea behind the Stuxnet computer worm is actually quite simple.
We don't want Iran to get the bomb.
Their major asset for developing nuclear weapons is the Natanz uranium enrichment facility.
The gray boxes that you see, these are real-time control systems.
Now if we manage to compromise these systems that control drive speeds and valves, we can actually cause a lot of problems with the centrifuge.
The gray boxes don't run Windows software; they are a completely different technology.
But if we manage to place a good Windows virus on a notebook that is used by a maintenance engineer to configure this gray box, then we are in business.
And this is the plot behind Stuxnet.
So we start with a Windows dropper.
The payload goes onto the gray box, damages the centrifuge, and the Iranian nuclear program is delayed -- mission accomplished.
That's easy, huh?
I want to tell you how we found that out.
When we started our research on Stuxnet six months ago, it was completely unknown what the purpose of this thing was.
The only thing that was known is it's very, very complex on the Windows part, the dropper part, used multiple zero-day vulnerabilities.
And it seemed to want to do something with these gray boxes, these real-time control systems.
So that got our attention, and we started a lab project where we infected our environment with Stuxnet and checked this thing out.
And then some very funny things happened.
Stuxnet behaved like a lab rat that didn't like our cheese -- sniffed, but didn't want to eat.
Didn't make sense to me.
And after we experimented with different flavors of cheese, I realized, well, this is a directed attack.
It's completely directed.
The dropper is prowling actively on the gray box if a specific configuration is found, and even if the actual program code that it's trying to infect is actually running on that target.
And if not, Stuxnet does nothing.
So that really got my attention, and we started to work on this nearly around the clock, because I thought, "Well, we don't know what the target is.
It could be, let's say for example, a U.S. power plant, or a chemical plant in Germany.
So we better find out what the target is soon."
So we extracted and decompiled the attack code, and we discovered that it's structured in two digital bombs -- a smaller one and a bigger one.
And we also saw that they are very professionally engineered by people who obviously had all insider information.
They knew all the bits and bites that they had to attack.
They probably even know the shoe size of the operator.
So they know everything.
And if you have heard that the dropper of Stuxnet is complex and high-tech, let me tell you this: the payload is rocket science.
It's way above everything that we have ever seen before.
Here you see a sample of this actual attack code.
We are talking about -- around about 15,000 lines of code.
Looks pretty much like old-style assembly language.
And I want to tell you how we were able to make sense out of this code.
So what we were looking for is, first of all, system function calls, because we know what they do.
And then we were looking for timers and data structures and trying to relate them to the real world -- to potential real world targets.
So we do need target theories that we can prove or disprove.
In order to get target theories, we remember that it's definitely hardcore sabotage, it must be a high-value target and it is most likely located in Iran, because that's where most of the infections had been reported.

