All but two of the sums are unique, and if the hallway number had matched any of these, Zara would have known the correct combination right then and there without asking for the third clue.
Since she did ask for the clue, the hallway number must have matched the only sum that appears more than once in the list: thirteen.
But which of the two combinations that add up to thirteen is correct: 1,6,6, or 2,2,9?
That's where the third clue comes in.
Since it tells us that the largest number must be unique, 2,2,9 must be the code.
When night falls, you and the others escape through hallway thirteen and rejoin Zara outside.
You've freed yourselves through math and logic.
Now it's time to free the rest of the world.
So if I told you that this was the face of pure joy, would you call me crazy?
I wouldn't blame you, because every time I look at this Arctic selfie, I shiver just a little bit.
I want to tell you a little bit about this photograph.
I was swimming around in the Lofoten Islands in Norway, just inside the Arctic Circle, and the water was hovering right at freezing.
The air?
A brisk -10 with windchill, and I could literally feel the blood trying to leave my hands, feet and face, and rush to protect my vital organs.
It was the coldest I've ever been.
But even with swollen lips, sunken eyes, and cheeks flushed red, I have found that this place right here is somewhere I can find great joy.
Now, when it comes to pain, psychologist Brock Bastian probably said it best when he wrote, "Pain is a kind of shortcut to mindfulness.
It makes us suddenly aware of everything in the environment.
It brutally draws us in to a virtual sensory awareness of the world much like meditation."
If shivering is a form of meditation, then I would consider myself a monk.
(Laughter) Now, before we get into the why would anyone ever want to surf in freezing cold water?
I would love to give you a little perspective on what a day in my life can look like.
(Music) (Video) Man: I mean, I know we were hoping for good waves, but I don't think anybody thought that was going to happen.
I can't stop shaking.
I am so cold.
(Music) (Applause) Chris Burkard: So, surf photographer, right?
I don't even know if it's a real job title, to be honest.
My parents definitely didn't think so when I told them at 19 I was quitting my job to pursue this dream career: blue skies, warm tropical beaches, and a tan that lasts all year long.
I mean, to me, this was it.
Life could not get any better.
Sweating it out, shooting surfers in these exotic tourist destinations.
But there was just this one problem.
You see, the more time I spent traveling to these exotic locations, the less gratifying it seemed to be.
I set out seeking adventure, and what I was finding was only routine.
It was things like wi-fi, TV, fine dining, and a constant cellular connection that to me were all the trappings of places heavily touristed in and out of the water, and it didn't take long for me to start feeling suffocated.
I began craving wild, open spaces, and so I set out to find the places others had written off as too cold, too remote, and too dangerous to surf, and that challenge intrigued me.
I began this sort of personal crusade against the mundane, because if there's one thing I've realized, it's that any career, even one as seemingly glamorous as surf photography, has the danger of becoming monotonous.
So in my search to break up this monotony, I realized something: There's only about a third of the Earth's oceans that are warm, and it's really just that thin band around the equator.
So if I was going to find perfect waves, it was probably going to happen somewhere cold, where the seas are notoriously rough, and that's exactly where I began to look.
And it was my first trip to Iceland that I felt like I found exactly what I was looking for.
I was blown away by the natural beauty of the landscape, but most importantly, I couldn't believe we were finding perfect waves in such a remote and rugged part of the world.
At one point, we got to the beach only to find massive chunks of ice had piled on the shoreline.
They created this barrier between us and the surf, and we had to weave through this thing like a maze just to get out into the lineup.
and once we got there, we were pushing aside these ice chunks trying to get into waves.
It was an incredible experience, one I'll never forget, because amidst those harsh conditions, I felt like I stumbled onto one of the last quiet places, somewhere that I found a clarity and a connection with the world I knew I would never find on a crowded beach.
I was hooked.
I was hooked.
(Laughter) Cold water was constantly on my mind, and from that point on, my career focused on these types of harsh and unforgiving environments, and it took me to places like Russia, Norway, Alaska, Iceland, Chile, the Faroe Islands, and a lot of places in between.
And one of my favorite things about these places was simply the challenge and the creativity it took just to get there: hours, days, weeks spent on Google Earth trying to pinpoint any remote stretch of beach or reef we could actually get to.
And once we got there, the vehicles were just as creative: snowmobiles, six-wheel Soviet troop carriers, and a couple of super-sketchy helicopter flights.
(Laughter) Helicopters really scare me, by the way.
There was this one particularly bumpy boat ride up the coast of Vancouver Island to this kind of remote surf spot, where we ended up watching helplessly from the water as bears ravaged our camp site.
They walked off with our food and bits of our tent, clearly letting us know that we were at the bottom of the food chain and that this was their spot, not ours.
But to me, that trip was a testament to the wildness I traded for those touristy beaches.
Now, it wasn't until I traveled to Norway -- (Laughter) -- that I really learned to appreciate the cold.
So this is the place where some of the largest, the most violent storms in the world send huge waves smashing into the coastline.
We were in this tiny, remote fjord, just inside the Arctic Circle.
It had a greater population of sheep than people, so help if we needed it was nowhere to be found.
I was in the water taking pictures of surfers, and it started to snow.
And then the temperature began to drop.
And I told myself, there's not a chance you're getting out of the water.
You traveled all this way, and this is exactly what you've been waiting for: freezing cold conditions with perfect waves.
And although I couldn't even feel my finger to push the trigger, I knew I wasn't getting out.
So I just did whatever I could.
I shook it off, whatever.
But that was the point that I felt this wind gush through the valley and hit me, and what started as this light snowfall quickly became a full-on blizzard, and I started to lose perception of where I was.
I didn't know if I was drifting out to sea or towards shore, and all I could really make out was the faint sound of seagulls and crashing waves.
Now, I knew this place had a reputation for sinking ships and grounding planes, and while I was out there floating, I started to get a little bit nervous.
Actually, I was totally freaking out -- (Laughter) -- and I was borderline hypothermic, and my friends eventually had to help me out of the water.
And I don't know if it was delirium setting in or what, but they told me later I had a smile on my face the entire time.
Now, it was this trip and probably that exact experience where I really began to feel like every photograph was precious, because all of a sudden in that moment, it was something I was forced to earn.
And I realized, all this shivering had actually taught me something: In life, there are no shortcuts to joy.
Anything that is worth pursuing is going to require us to suffer just a little bit, and that tiny bit of suffering that I did for my photography, it added a value to my work that was so much more meaningful to me than just trying to fill the pages of magazines.
See, I gave a piece of myself in these places, and what I walked away with was a sense of fulfillment I had always been searching for.
So I look back at this photograph.
It's easy to see frozen fingers and cold wetsuits and even the struggle that it took just to get there, but most of all, what I see is just joy.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Having spent 18 years as a child of the state in children's homes and foster care, you could say that I'm an expert on the subject, and in being an expert, I want to let you know that being an expert does in no way make you right in light of the truth.
If you're in care, legally the government is your parent, loco parentis.
Margaret Thatcher was my mother.
(Laughter) Let's not talk about breastfeeding.
(Laughter) Harry Potter was a foster child.
Pip from "Great Expectations" was adopted; Superman was a foster child; Cinderella was a foster child; Lisbeth Salander, the girl with the dragon tattoo, was fostered and institutionalized; Batman was orphaned; Lyra Belacqua from Philip Pullman's "Northern Lights" was fostered; Jane Eyre, adopted; Roald Dahl's James from "James and the Giant Peach;" Matilda; Moses -- Moses!
(Laughter) Moses!
(Laughter) -- the boys in Michael Morpurgo's "Friend or Foe;" Alem in Benjamin Zephaniah's "Refugee Boy;" Luke Skywalker -- Luke Skywalker!
(Laughter) -- Oliver Twist; Cassia in "The Concubine of Shanghai" by Hong Ying; Celie in Alice Walker's "The Color Purple."
All of these great fictional characters, all of them who were hurt by their condition, all of them who spawned thousands of other books and other films, all of them were fostered, adopted or orphaned.
It seems that writers know that the child outside of family reflects on what family truly is more than what it promotes itself to be.
That is, they also use extraordinary skills to deal with extraordinary situations on a daily basis.
How have we not made the connection?
And why have we not made the connection, between — How has that happened? — between these incredible characters of popular culture and religions, and the fostered, adopted or orphaned child in our midst?
It's not our pity that they need.
It's our respect.
I know famous musicians, I know actors and film stars and millionaires and novelists and top lawyers and television executives and magazine editors and national journalists and dustbinmen and hairdressers, all who were looked after children, fostered, adopted or orphaned, and many of them grow into their adult lives in fear of speaking of their background, as if it may somehow weaken their standing in the foreground, as if it were somehow Kryptonite, as if it were a time bomb strapped on the inside.
Children in care, who've had a life in care, deserve the right to own and live the memory of their own childhood.
It is that simple.
My own mother — and I should say this here — she same to this country in the late '60s, and she was, you know, she found herself pregnant, as women did in the late '60s.
You know what I mean?
They found themselves pregnant.
And she sort of, she had no idea of the context in which she'd landed.
In the 1960s -- I should give you some context -- in the 1960s, if you were pregnant and you were single, you were seen as a threat to the community.
You were separated from your family by the state.
You were separated from your family and placed into mother and baby homes.
You were appointed a social worker.
The adoptive parents were lined up.
It was the primary purpose of the social worker, the aim, to get the woman at her most vulnerable time in her entire life, to sign the adoption papers.
So the adoption papers were signed.
The mother and baby's homes were often run by nuns.
The adoption papers were signed, the child was given to the adoptive parents, and the mother shipped back to her community to say that she'd been on a little break.
A little break.
A little break.
The first secret of shame for a woman for being a woman, "a little break."
The adoption process took, like, a matter of months, so it was a closed shop, you know, sealed deal, an industrious, utilitarian solution: the government, the farmer, the adopting parents, the consumer, the mother, the earth, and the child, the crop.
It's kind of easy to patronize the past, to forego our responsibilities in the present.
What happened then is a direct reflection of what is happening now.
Everybody believed themselves to be doing the right thing by God and by the state for the big society, fast-tracking adoption.
So anyway, she comes here, 1967, she's pregnant, and she comes from Ethiopia that was celebrating its own jubilee at the time under the Emperor Haile Selassie, and she lands months before the Enoch Powell speech, the "Rivers of Blood" speech.
She lands months before the Beatles release "The White Album," months before Martin Luther King was killed.
It was a summer of love if you were white.
If you were black, it was a summer of hate.
So she goes from Oxford, she's sent to the north of England to a mother and baby home, and appointed a social worker.
It's her plan.
You know, I have to say this in the Houses -- It's her plan to have me fostered for a short period of time while she studies.
But the social worker, he had a different agenda.
He found the foster parents, and he said to them, "Treat this as an adoption.
He's yours forever.
His name is Norman."
(Laughter) Norman!
(Laughter) Norman!
So they took me.
I was a message, they said.
I was a sign from God, they said.
I was Norman Mark Greenwood.
Now, for the next 11 years, all I know is that this woman, this birth woman, should have her eyes scratched out for not signing the adoption papers.
She was an evil woman too selfish to sign, so I spent those 11 years kneeling and praying.
I tried praying.
I swear I tried praying.
"God, can I have a bike for Christmas?"
But I would always answer myself, "Yes, of course you can."
(Laughter) And then I was supposed to determine whether that was the voice of God or it was the voice of the Devil.
And it turns out I've got the Devil inside of me.
Who knew?
(Laughter) So anyway, two years sort of passed, and they had a child of their own, and then another two years passed, and they had another child of their own, and then another time passed and they had another child that they called an accident, which I thought was an unusual name.
(Laughter) And I was on the cusp of, sort of, adolescence, so I was starting to take biscuits from the tin without asking.
I was starting to stay out a little bit late, etc., etc.
Now, in their religiosity, in their naivete, my mom and dad, which I believed them to be forever, as they said they were, my mom and dad conceived that I had the Devil inside of me.
And what -- I should say this here, because this is how they engineered my leaving.
They sat me at a table, my foster mom, and she said to me, "You don't love us, do you?"
At 11 years old.
They've had three other children.
I'm the fourth.
The third was an accident.
And I said, "Yeah, of course I do."
Because you do.
My foster mother asked me to go away to think about love and what it is and to read the Scriptures and to come back tomorrow and give my most honest and truthful answer.
So this was an opportunity.
If they were asking me whether I loved them or not, then I mustn't love them, which led me to the miracle of thought that I thought they wanted me to get to.
"I will ask God for forgiveness and His light will shine through me to them.
How fantastic."
This was an opportunity.
The theology was perfect, the timing unquestionable, and the answer as honest as a sinner could get.
"I mustn't love you," I said to them.
"But I will ask God for forgiveness."
"Because you don't love us, Norman, clearly you've chosen your path."
Twenty-four hours later, my social worker, this strange man who used to visit me every couple of months, he's waiting for me in the car as I say goodbye to my parents.
I didn't say goodbye to anybody, not my mother, my father, my sisters, my brothers, my aunts, my uncles, my cousins, my grandparents, nobody.
On the way to the children's home, I started to ask myself, "What's happened to me?"
It's not that I'd had the rug pulled from beneath me as much as the entire floor had been taken away.
When I got to the — For the next four, five years, I was held in four different children's homes.
On the third children's home, at 15, I started to rebel, and what I did was, I got three tins of paint, Airfix paint that you use for models, and I was -- it was a big children's home, big Victorian children's home -- and I was in a little turret at the top of it, and I poured them, red, yellow and green, the colors of Africa, down the tiles.
You couldn't see it from the street, because the home was surrounded by beech trees.
For doing this, I was incarcerated for a year in an assessment center which was actually a remand center.
It was a virtual prison for young people.
By the way, years later, my social worker said that I should never have been put in there.
I wasn't charged for anything.
I hadn't done anything wrong.
But because I had no family to inquire about me, they could do anything to me.
I'm 17 years old, and they had a padded cell.
They would march me down corridors in last-size order.
They -- I was put in a dormitory with a confirmed Nazi sympathizer.
All of the staff were ex-police -- interesting -- and ex-probation officers.
The man who ran it was an ex-army officer.
Every time I had a visit by a person who I did not know who would feed me grapes, once every three months, I was strip-searched.
That home was full of young boys who were on remand for things like murder.
And this was the preparation that I was being given after 17 years as a child of the state.
I have to tell this story.
I have to tell it, because there was no one to put two and two together.
I slowly became aware that I knew nobody that knew me for longer than a year.
See, that's what family does.
It gives you reference points.
I'm not defining a good family from a bad family.
I'm just saying that you know when your birthday is by virtue of the fact that somebody tells you when your birthday is, a mother, a father, a sister, a brother, an aunt, an uncle, a cousin, a grandparent.
It matters to someone, and therefore it matters to you.
Understand, I was 14 years old, tucked away in myself, into myself, and I wasn't touched either, physically touched.
I'm reporting back.
I'm reporting back simply to say that when I left the children's home I had two things that I wanted to do.
One was to find my family, and the other was to write poetry.
In creativity I saw light.
In the imagination I saw the endless possibility of life, the endless truth, the permanent creation of reality, the place where anger was an expression in the search for love, a place where dysfunction is a true reaction to untruth.

