It was the first computer animation any of us had ever seen.
I watched these films in wonder, transfixed, fireworks going off in my head, thinking, "That is what I want to do with my life."
The idea that all the math, science and code I had been learning could come together to create these worlds and characters and stories I connected with, was pure magic for me.
Just two years later, I started working at the place that made those films, Pixar Animation Studios.
It was here I learned how we actually execute those films.
To create our movies, we create a three-dimensional world inside the computer.
We start with a point that makes a line that makes a face that creates characters, or trees and rocks that eventually become a forest.
And because it's a three-dimensional world, we can move a camera around inside that world.
I was fascinated by all of it.
But then I got my first taste of lighting.
Lighting in practice is placing lights inside this three-dimensional world.
I actually have icons of lights I move around in there.
Here you can see I've added a light, I'm turning on the rough version of lighting in our software, turn on shadows and placing the light.
As I place a light, I think about what it might look like in real life, but balance that out with what we need artistically and for the story.
So it might look like this at first, but as we adjust this and move that in weeks of work, in rough form it might look like this, and in final form, like this.
There's this moment in lighting that made me fall utterly in love with it.
It's where we go from this to this.
It's the moment where all the pieces come together, and suddenly the world comes to life as if it's an actual place that exists.
This moment never gets old, especially for that little seven-year-old girl that wanted to be an artist.
As I learned to light, I learned about using light to help tell story, to set the time of day, to create the mood, to guide the audience's eye, how to make a character look appealing or stand out in a busy set.
Did you see WALL-E?
(Laughter) There he is.
As you can see, we can create any world that we want inside the computer.
We can make a world with monsters, with robots that fall in love, we can even make pigs fly.
(Laughter) While this is an incredible thing, this untethered artistic freedom, it can create chaos.
It can create unbelievable worlds, unbelievable movement, things that are jarring to the audience.
So to combat this, we tether ourselves with science.
We use science and the world we know as a backbone, to ground ourselves in something relatable and recognizable.
"Finding Nemo" is an excellent example of this.
A major portion of the movie takes place underwater.
But how do you make it look underwater?
In early research and development, we took a clip of underwater footage and recreated it in the computer.
Then we broke it back down to see which elements make up that underwater look.
One of the most critical elements was how the light travels through the water.
So we coded up a light that mimics this physics -- first, the visibility of the water, and then what happens with the color.
Objects close to the eye have their full, rich colors.
As light travels deeper into the water, we lose the red wavelengths, then the green wavelengths, leaving us with blue at the far depths.
In this clip you can see two other important elements.
The first is the surge and swell, or the invisible underwater current that pushes the bits of particulate around in the water.
The second is the caustics.
These are the ribbons of light, like you might see on the bottom of a pool, that are created when the sun bends through the crests of the ripples and waves on the ocean's surface.
Here we have the fog beams.
These give us color depth cues, but also tells which direction is up in shots where we don't see the water surface.
The other really cool thing you can see here is that we lit that particulate only with the caustics, so that as it goes in and out of those ribbons of light, it appears and disappears, lending a subtle, magical sparkle to the underwater.
You can see how we're using the science -- the physics of water, light and movement -- to tether that artistic freedom.
But we are not beholden to it.
We considered each of these elements and which ones had to be scientifically accurate and which ones we could push and pull to suit the story and the mood.
We realized early on that color was one we had some leeway with.
So here's a traditionally colored underwater scene.
But here, we can take Sydney Harbor and push it fairly green to suit the sad mood of what's happening.
In this scene, it's really important we see deep into the underwater, so we understand what the East Australian Current is, that the turtles are diving into and going on this roller coaster ride.
So we pushed the visibility of the water well past anything you would ever see in real life.
Because in the end, we are not trying to recreate the scientifically correct real world, we're trying to create a believable world, one the audience can immerse themselves in to experience the story.
We use science to create something wonderful.
We use story and artistic touch to get us to a place of wonder.
This guy, WALL-E, is a great example of that.
He finds beauty in the simplest things.
But when he came in to lighting, we knew we had a big problem.
We got so geeked-out on making WALL-E this convincing robot, that we made his binoculars practically optically perfect.
(Laughter) His binoculars are one of the most critical acting devices he has.
He doesn't have a face or even traditional dialogue, for that matter.
So the animators were heavily dependent on the binoculars to sell his acting and emotions.
We started lighting and we realized the triple lenses inside his binoculars were a mess of reflections.
He was starting to look glassy-eyed.
(Laughter) Now, glassy-eyed is a fundamentally awful thing when you are trying to convince an audience that a robot has a personality and he's capable of falling in love.
So we went to work on these optically perfect binoculars, trying to find a solution that would maintain his true robot materials but solve this reflection problem.
So we started with the lenses.
Here's the flat-front lens, we have a concave lens and a convex lens.
And here you see all three together, showing us all these reflections.
We tried turning them down, we tried blocking them, nothing was working.
You can see here, sometimes we needed something specific reflected in his eyes -- usually Eve.
So we couldn't just use some faked abstract image on the lenses.
So here we have Eve on the first lens, we put Eve on the second lens, it's not working.
We turn it down, it's still not working.
And then we have our eureka moment.
We add a light to WALL-E that accidentally leaks into his eyes.
You can see it light up these gray aperture blades.
Suddenly, those aperture blades are poking through that reflection the way nothing else has.
Now we recognize WALL-E as having an eye.
As humans we have the white of our eye, the colored iris and the black pupil.
Now WALL-E has the black of an eye, the gray aperture blades and the black pupil.
Suddenly, WALL-E feels like he has a soul, like there's a character with emotion inside.
Later in the movie towards the end, WALL-E loses his personality, essentially going dead.
This is the perfect time to bring back that glassy-eyed look.
In the next scene, WALL-E comes back to life.
We bring that light back to bring the aperture blades back, and he returns to that sweet, soulful robot we've come to love.
(Video) WALL-E: Eva?
Danielle Feinberg: There's a beauty in these unexpected moments -- when you find the key to unlocking a robot's soul, the moment when you discover what you want to do with your life.
The jellyfish in "Finding Nemo" was one of those moments for me.
There are scenes in every movie that struggle to come together.
This was one of those scenes.
The director had a vision for this scene based on some wonderful footage of jellyfish in the South Pacific.
As we went along, we were floundering.
The reviews with the director turned from the normal look-and-feel conversation into more and more questions about numbers and percentages.
Maybe because unlike normal, we were basing it on something in real life, or maybe just because we had lost our way.
But it had become about using our brain without our eyes, the science without the art.
That scientific tether was strangling the scene.
But even through all the frustrations, I still believed it could be beautiful.
So when it came in to lighting, I dug in.
As I worked to balance the blues and the pinks, the caustics dancing on the jellyfish bells, the undulating fog beams, something promising began to appear.
I came in one morning and checked the previous night's work.
And I got excited.
And then I showed it to the lighting director and she got excited.
Soon, I was showing to the director in a dark room full of 50 people.
In director review, you hope you might get some nice words, then you get some notes and fixes, generally.
And then, hopefully, you get a final, signaling to move on to the next stage.
I gave my intro, and I played the jellyfish scene.
And the director was silent for an uncomfortably long amount of time.
Just long enough for me to think, "Oh no, this is doomed."
And then he started clapping.
And then the production designer started clapping.
And then the whole room was clapping.
This is the moment that I live for in lighting.
The moment where it all comes together and we get a world that we can believe in.
We use math, science and code to create these amazing worlds.
We use storytelling and art to bring them to life.
It's this interweaving of art and science that elevates the world to a place of wonder, a place with soul, a place we can believe in, a place where the things you imagine can become real -- and a world where a girl suddenly realizes not only is she a scientist, but also an artist.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The universe is teeming with planets.
I want us, in the next decade, to build a space telescope that'll be able to image an Earth about another star and figure out whether it can harbor life.
My colleagues at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Princeton and I are working on technology that will be able to do just that in the coming years.
Astronomers now believe that every star in the galaxy has a planet, and they speculate that up to one fifth of them have an Earth-like planet that might be able to harbor life, but we haven't seen any of them.
We've only detected them indirectly.
This is NASA's famous picture of the pale blue dot.
It was taken by the Voyager spacecraft in 1990, when they turned it around as it was exiting the solar system to take a picture of the Earth from six billion kilometers away.
I want to take that of an Earth-like planet about another star.
Why haven't we done that?
Why is that hard?
Well to see, let's imagine we take the Hubble Space Telescope and we turn it around and we move it out to the orbit of Mars.
We'll see something like that, a slightly blurry picture of the Earth, because we're a fairly small telescope out at the orbit of Mars.
Now let's move ten times further away.
Here we are at the orbit of Uranus.
It's gotten smaller, it's got less detail, less resolve.
We can still see the little moon, but let's go ten times further away again.
Here we are at the edge of the solar system, out at the Kuiper Belt.
Now it's not resolved at all.
It's that pale blue dot of Carl Sagan's.
But let's move yet again ten times further away.
Here we are out at the Oort Cloud, outside the solar system, and we're starting to see the sun move into the field of view and get into where the planet is.
One more time, ten times further away.
Now we're at Alpha Centauri, our nearest neighbor star, and the planet is gone.
All we're seeing is the big beaming image of the star that's ten billion times brighter than the planet, which should be in that little red circle.
That's what we want to see.
That's why it's hard.
The light from the star is diffracting.
It's scattering inside the telescope, creating that very bright image that washes out the planet.
So to see the planet, we have to do something about all of that light.
We have to get rid of it.
I have a lot of colleagues working on really amazing technologies to do that, but I want to tell you about one today that I think is the coolest, and probably the most likely to get us an Earth in the next decade.
It was first suggested by Lyman Spitzer, the father of the space telescope, in 1962, and he took his inspiration from an eclipse.
You've all seen that.
That's a solar eclipse.
The moon has moved in front of the sun.
It blocks out most of the light so we can see that dim corona around it.
It would be the same thing if I put my thumb up and blocked that spotlight that's getting right in my eye, I can see you in the back row.
Well, what's going on?
Well the moon is casting a shadow down on the Earth.
We put a telescope or a camera in that shadow, we look back at the sun, and most of the light's been removed and we can see that dim, fine structure in the corona.
Spitzer's suggestion was we do this in space.
We build a big screen, we fly it in space, we put it up in front of the star, we block out most of the light, we fly a space telescope in that shadow that's created, and boom, we get to see planets.
Well that would look something like this.
So there's that big screen, and there's no planets, because unfortunately it doesn't actually work very well, because the light waves of the light and waves diffracts around that screen the same way it did in the telescope.
It's like water bending around a rock in a stream, and all that light just destroys the shadow.
It's a terrible shadow.
And we can't see planets.
But Spitzer actually knew the answer.
If we can feather the edges, soften those edges so we can control diffraction, well then we can see a planet, and in the last 10 years or so we've come up with optimal solutions for doing that.
It looks something like that.
We call that our flower petal starshade.
If we make the edges of those petals exactly right, if we control their shape, we can control diffraction, and now we have a great shadow.
It's about 10 billion times dimmer than it was before, and we can see the planets beam out just like that.
That, of course, has to be bigger than my thumb.
That starshade is about the size of half a football field and it has to fly 50,000 kilometers away from the telescope that has to be held right in its shadow, and then we can see those planets.
This sounds formidable, but brilliant engineers, colleagues of mine at JPL, came up with a fabulous design for how to do that and it looks like this.
It starts wrapped around a hub.
It separates from the telescope.
The petals unfurl, they open up, the telescope turns around.
Then you'll see it flip and fly out that 50,000 kilometers away from the telescope.
It's going to move in front of the star just like that, creates a wonderful shadow.
Boom, we get planets orbiting about it.
(Applause) Thank you.
That's not science fiction.
We've been working on this for the last five or six years.
Last summer, we did a really cool test out in California at Northrop Grumman.
So those are four petals.
This is a sub-scale star shade.
It's about half the size of the one you just saw.
You'll see the petals unfurl.
Those four petals were built by four undergraduates doing a summer internship at JPL.
Now you're seeing it deploy.
Those petals have to rotate into place.
The base of those petals has to go to the same place every time to within a tenth of a millimeter.
We ran this test 16 times, and 16 times it went into the exact same place to a tenth of a millimeter.
This has to be done very precisely, but if we can do this, if we can build this technology, if we can get it into space, you might see something like this.
That's a picture of one our nearest neighbor stars taken with the Hubble Space Telescope.
If we can take a similar space telescope, slightly larger, put it out there, fly an occulter in front of it, what we might see is something like that -- that's a family portrait of our solar system -- but not ours.
We're hoping it'll be someone else's solar system as seen through an occulter, through a starshade like that.
You can see Jupiter, you can see Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and right there in the center, next to the residual light is that pale blue dot.
That's Earth.
We want to see that, see if there's water, oxygen, ozone, the things that might tell us that it could harbor life.
I think this is the coolest possible science.
That's why I got into doing this, because I think that will change the world.
That will change everything when we see that.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was about eight years old, I first heard about something called climate change or global warming.
Apparently, that was something humans had created by our way of living.
I was told to turn off the lights to save energy and to recycle paper to save resources.
I remember thinking that it was very strange that humans, who are an animal species among others, could be capable of changing the Earth's climate.
Because if we were, and if it was really happening, we wouldn't be talking about anything else.
As soon as you'd turn on the TV, everything would be about that.
Headlines, radio, newspapers, you would never read or hear about anything else, as if there was a world war going on.
But no one ever talked about it.
If burning fossil fuels was so bad that it threatened our very existence, how could we just continue like before?
Why were there no restrictions?
Why wasn't it made illegal?
To me, that did not add up.
It was too unreal.
So when I was 11, I became ill.
I fell into depression, I stopped talking, and I stopped eating.
In two months, I lost about 10 kilos of weight.
Later on, I was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome, OCD and selective mutism.
That basically means I only speak when I think it's necessary - now is one of those moments.
(Applause) For those of us who are on the spectrum, almost everything is black or white.
We aren't very good at lying, and we usually don't enjoy participating in this social game that the rest of you seem so fond of.
(Laughter) I think in many ways that we autistic are the normal ones, and the rest of the people are pretty strange, (Laughter) especially when it comes to the sustainability crisis, where everyone keeps saying climate change is an existential threat and the most important issue of all, and yet they just carry on like before.
I don't understand that, because if the emissions have to stop, then we must stop the emissions.
To me that is black or white.
There are no gray areas when it comes to survival.
Either we go on as a civilization or we don't.
We have to change.

