Its ultimate destination is this, the greater flamingo.
Only in a flamingo can the tapeworm reproduce, so to get there, it manipulates its shrimp hosts into forming these conspicuous colored swarms that are easier for a flamingo to spot and to devour, and that is the secret of the Artemia swarm.
They aren't sociable through their own volition, but because they are being controlled.
It's not safety in numbers.
It's actually the exact opposite.
The tapeworm hijacks their brains and their bodies, turning them into vehicles for getting itself into a flamingo.
And here is another example of a parasitic manipulation.
This is a suicidal cricket.
This cricket swallowed the larvae of a Gordian worm, or horsehair worm.
The worm grew to adult size within it, but it needs to get into water in order to mate, and it does that by releasing proteins that addle the cricket's brain, causing it to behave erratically.
When the cricket nears a body of water, such as this swimming pool, it jumps in and drowns, and the worm wriggles out of its suicidal corpse.
Crickets are really roomy.
Who knew?
The tapeworm and the Gordian worm are not alone.
They are part of an entire cavalcade of mind-controlling parasites, of fungi, viruses, and worms and insects and more that all specialize in subverting and overriding the wills of their hosts.
Now, I first learned about this way of life through David Attenborough's "Trials of Life" about 20 years ago, and then later through a wonderful book called "Parasite Rex" by my friend Carl Zimmer.
And I've been writing about these creatures ever since.
Few topics in biology enthrall me more.
It's like the parasites have subverted my own brain.
Because after all, they are always compelling and they are delightfully macabre.
When you write about parasites, your lexicon swells with phrases like "devoured alive" and "bursts out of its body."
(Laughter) But there's more to it than that.
I'm a writer, and fellow writers in the audience will know that we love stories.
Parasites invite us to resist the allure of obvious stories.
Their world is one of plot twists and unexpected explanations.
Why, for example, does this caterpillar start violently thrashing about when another insect gets close to it and those white cocoons that it seems to be standing guard over?
Is it maybe protecting its siblings?
No.
This caterpillar was attacked by a parasitic wasp which laid eggs inside it.
The eggs hatched and the young wasps devoured the caterpillar alive before bursting out of its body.
See what I mean?
Now, the caterpillar didn't die.
Some of the wasps seemed to stay behind and controlled it into defending their siblings which are metamorphosing into adults within those cocoons.
This caterpillar is a head-banging zombie bodyguard defending the offspring of the creature that killed it.
(Applause) We have a lot to get through.
I only have 13 minutes.
(Laughter) Now, some of you are probably just desperately clawing for some solace in the idea that these things are oddities of the natural world, that they are outliers, and that point of view is understandable, because by their nature, parasites are quite small and they spend a lot of their time inside the bodies of other things.
They're easy to overlook, but that doesn't mean that they aren't important.
A few years back, a man called Kevin Lafferty took a group of scientists into three Californian estuaries and they pretty much weighed and dissected and recorded everything they could find, and what they found were parasites in extreme abundance.
Especially common were trematodes, tiny worms that specialize in castrating their hosts like this unfortunate snail.
Now, a single trematode is tiny, microscopic, but collectively they weighed as much as all the fish in the estuaries and three to nine times more than all the birds.
And remember the Gordian worm that I showed you, the cricket thing?
One Japanese scientist called Takuya Sato found that in one stream, these things drive so many crickets and grasshoppers into the water that the drowned insects make up some 60 percent of the diet of local trout.
Manipulation is not an oddity.
It is a critical and common part of the world around us, and scientists have now found hundreds of examples of such manipulators, and more excitingly, they're starting to understand exactly how these creatures control their hosts.
And this is one of my favorite examples.
This is Ampulex compressa, the emerald cockroach wasp, and it is a truth universally acknowledged that an emerald cockroach wasp in possession of some fertilized eggs must be in want of a cockroach.
When she finds one, she stabs it with a stinger that is also a sense organ.
This discovery came out three weeks ago.
She stabs it with a stinger that is a sense organ equipped with small sensory bumps that allow her to feel the distinctive texture of a roach's brain.
So like a person blindly rooting about in a bag, she finds the brain, and she injects it with venom into two very specific clusters of neurons.
Israeli scientists Frederic Libersat and Ram Gal found that the venom is a very specific chemical weapon.
It doesn't kill the roach, nor does it sedate it.
The roach could walk away or fly or run if it chose to, but it doesn't choose to, because the venom nixes its motivation to walk, and only that.
The wasp basically un-checks the escape-from-danger box in the roach's operating system, allowing her to lead her helpless victim back to her lair by its antennae like a person walking a dog.
And once there, she lays an egg on it, egg hatches, devoured alive, bursts out of body, yadda yadda yadda, you know the drill.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now I would argue that, once stung, the cockroach isn't a roach anymore.
It's more of an extension of the wasp, just like the cricket was an extension of the Gordian worm.
These hosts won't get to survive or reproduce.
They have as much control over their own fates as my car.
Once the parasites get in, the hosts don't get a say.
Now humans, of course, are no stranger to manipulation.
We take drugs to shift the chemistries of our brains and to change our moods, and what are arguments or advertising or big ideas if not an attempt to influence someone else's mind?
But our attempts at doing this are crude and blundering compared to the fine-grained specificity of the parasites.
Don Draper only wishes he was as elegant and precise as the emerald cockroach wasp.
Now, I think this is part of what makes parasites so sinister and so compelling.
We place such a premium on our free will and our independence that the prospect of losing those qualities to forces unseen informs many of our deepest societal fears.
Orwellian dystopias and shadowy cabals and mind-controlling supervillains -- these are tropes that fill our darkest fiction, but in nature, they happen all the time.
Which leads me to an obvious and disquieting question: Are there dark, sinister parasites that are influencing our behavior without us knowing about it, besides the NSA?
If there are any — (Laughter) (Applause) I've got a red dot on my forehead now, don't I?
(Laughter) If there are any, this is a good candidate for them.
This is Toxoplasma gondii, or Toxo, for short, because the terrifying creature always deserves a cute nickname.
Toxo infects mammals, a wide variety of mammals, but it can only sexually reproduce in a cat.
And scientists like Joanne Webster have shown that if Toxo gets into a rat or a mouse, it turns the rodent into a cat-seeking missile.
If the infected rat smells the delightful odor of cat piss, it runs towards the source of the smell rather than the more sensible direction of away.
The cat eats the rat.
Toxo gets to have sex.
It's a classic tale of Eat, Prey, Love.
(Laughter) (Applause) You're very charitable, generous people.
Hi, Elizabeth, I loved your talk.
How does the parasite control its host in this way?
We don't really know.
We know that Toxo releases an enzyme that makes dopamine, a substance involved in reward and motivation.
We know it targets certain parts of a rodent's brain, including those involved in sexual arousal.
But how those puzzle pieces fit together is not immediately clear.
What is clear is that this thing is a single cell.
This has no nervous system.
It has no consciousness.
It doesn't even have a body.
But it's manipulating a mammal?
We are mammals.
We are more intelligent than a mere rat, to be sure, but our brains have the same basic structure, the same types of cells, the same chemicals running through them, and the same parasites.
Estimates vary a lot, but some figures suggest that one in three people around the world have Toxo in their brains.
Now typically, this doesn't lead to any overt illness.
The parasite holds up in a dormant state for a long period of time.
But there's some evidence that those people who are carriers score slightly differently on personality questionnaires than other people, that they have a slightly higher risk of car accidents, and there's some evidence that people with schizophrenia are more likely to be infected.
Now, I think this evidence is still inconclusive, and even among Toxo researchers, opinion is divided as to whether the parasite is truly influencing our behavior.
But given the widespread nature of such manipulations, it would be completely implausible for humans to be the only species that weren't similarly affected.
And I think that this capacity to constantly subvert our way of thinking about the world makes parasites amazing.
They're constantly inviting us to look at the natural world sideways, and to ask if the behaviors we're seeing, whether they're simple and obvious or baffling and puzzling, are not the results of individuals acting through their own accord but because they are being bent to the control of something else.
And while that idea may be disquieting, and while parasites' habits may be very grisly, I think that ability to surprise us makes them as wonderful and as charismatic as any panda or butterfly or dolphin.
At the end of "On the Origin of Species," Charles Darwin writes about the grandeur of life, and of endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful, and I like to think he could easily have been talking about a tapeworm that makes shrimp sociable or a wasp that takes cockroaches for walks.
But perhaps, that's just a parasite talking.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, on April 23 of 2013, the Associated Press put out the following tweet on Twitter.
It said, "Breaking news: Two explosions at the White House and Barack Obama has been injured."
This tweet was retweeted 4,000 times in less than five minutes, and it went viral thereafter.
Now, this tweet wasn't real news put out by the Associated Press.
In fact it was false news, or fake news, that was propagated by Syrian hackers that had infiltrated the Associated Press Twitter handle.
Their purpose was to disrupt society, but they disrupted much more.
Because automated trading algorithms immediately seized on the sentiment on this tweet, and began trading based on the potential that the president of the United States had been injured or killed in this explosion.
And as they started tweeting, they immediately sent the stock market crashing, wiping out 140 billion dollars in equity value in a single day.
Robert Mueller, special counsel prosecutor in the United States, issued indictments against three Russian companies and 13 Russian individuals on a conspiracy to defraud the United States by meddling in the 2016 presidential election.
And what this indictment tells as a story is the story of the Internet Research Agency, the shadowy arm of the Kremlin on social media.
During the presidential election alone, the Internet Agency's efforts reached 126 million people on Facebook in the United States, issued three million individual tweets and 43 hours' worth of YouTube content.
All of which was fake -- misinformation designed to sow discord in the US presidential election.
A recent study by Oxford University showed that in the recent Swedish elections, one third of all of the information spreading on social media about the election was fake or misinformation.
In addition, these types of social-media misinformation campaigns can spread what has been called "genocidal propaganda," for instance against the Rohingya in Burma, triggering mob killings in India.
We studied fake news and began studying it before it was a popular term.
And we recently published the largest-ever longitudinal study of the spread of fake news online on the cover of "Science" in March of this year.
We studied all of the verified true and false news stories that ever spread on Twitter, from its inception in 2006 to 2017.
And when we studied this information, we studied verified news stories that were verified by six independent fact-checking organizations.
So we knew which stories were true and which stories were false.
We can measure their diffusion, the speed of their diffusion, the depth and breadth of their diffusion, how many people become entangled in this information cascade and so on.
And what we did in this paper was we compared the spread of true news to the spread of false news.
And here's what we found.
We found that false news diffused further, faster, deeper and more broadly than the truth in every category of information that we studied, sometimes by an order of magnitude.
And in fact, false political news was the most viral.
It diffused further, faster, deeper and more broadly than any other type of false news.
When we saw this, we were at once worried but also curious.
Why?
Why does false news travel so much further, faster, deeper and more broadly than the truth?
The first hypothesis that we came up with was, "Well, maybe people who spread false news have more followers or follow more people, or tweet more often, or maybe they're more often 'verified' users of Twitter, with more credibility, or maybe they've been on Twitter longer."
So we checked each one of these in turn.
And what we found was exactly the opposite.
False-news spreaders had fewer followers, followed fewer people, were less active, less often "verified" and had been on Twitter for a shorter period of time.
And yet, false news was 70 percent more likely to be retweeted than the truth, controlling for all of these and many other factors.
So we had to come up with other explanations.
And we devised what we called a "novelty hypothesis."
So if you read the literature, it is well known that human attention is drawn to novelty, things that are new in the environment.
And if you read the sociology literature, you know that we like to share novel information.
It makes us seem like we have access to inside information, and we gain in status by spreading this kind of information.
So what we did was we measured the novelty of an incoming true or false tweet, compared to the corpus of what that individual had seen in the 60 days prior on Twitter.
But that wasn't enough, because we thought to ourselves, "Well, maybe false news is more novel in an information-theoretic sense, but maybe people don't perceive it as more novel."
So to understand people's perceptions of false news, we looked at the information and the sentiment contained in the replies to true and false tweets.
And what we found was that across a bunch of different measures of sentiment -- surprise, disgust, fear, sadness, anticipation, joy and trust -- false news exhibited significantly more surprise and disgust in the replies to false tweets.
And true news exhibited significantly more anticipation, joy and trust in reply to true tweets.
The surprise corroborates our novelty hypothesis.
This is new and surprising, and so we're more likely to share it.
At the same time, there was congressional testimony in front of both houses of Congress in the United States, looking at the role of bots in the spread of misinformation.
So we looked at this too -- we used multiple sophisticated bot-detection algorithms to find the bots in our data and to pull them out.
So we pulled them out, we put them back in and we compared what happens to our measurement.
And what we found was that, yes indeed, bots were accelerating the spread of false news online, but they were accelerating the spread of true news at approximately the same rate.
Which means bots are not responsible for the differential diffusion of truth and falsity online.
We can't abdicate that responsibility, because we, humans, are responsible for that spread.
Now, everything that I have told you so far, unfortunately for all of us, is the good news.
The reason is because it's about to get a whole lot worse.
And two specific technologies are going to make it worse.
We are going to see the rise of a tremendous wave of synthetic media.
Fake video, fake audio that is very convincing to the human eye.
And this will powered by two technologies.
The first of these is known as "generative adversarial networks."
This is a machine-learning model with two networks: a discriminator, whose job it is to determine whether something is true or false, and a generator, whose job it is to generate synthetic media.
So the synthetic generator generates synthetic video or audio, and the discriminator tries to tell, "Is this real or is this fake?"
And in fact, it is the job of the generator to maximize the likelihood that it will fool the discriminator into thinking the synthetic video and audio that it is creating is actually true.
Imagine a machine in a hyperloop, trying to get better and better at fooling us.
This, combined with the second technology, which is essentially the democratization of artificial intelligence to the people, the ability for anyone, without any background in artificial intelligence or machine learning, to deploy these kinds of algorithms to generate synthetic media makes it ultimately so much easier to create videos.
The White House issued a false, doctored video of a journalist interacting with an intern who was trying to take his microphone.
They removed frames from this video in order to make his actions seem more punchy.
And when videographers and stuntmen and women were interviewed about this type of technique, they said, "Yes, we use this in the movies all the time to make our punches and kicks look more choppy and more aggressive."
They then put out this video and partly used it as justification to revoke Jim Acosta, the reporter's, press pass from the White House.
And CNN had to sue to have that press pass reinstated.
There are about five different paths that I can think of that we can follow to try and address some of these very difficult problems today.
Each one of them has promise, but each one of them has its own challenges.
The first one is labeling.
Think about it this way: when you go to the grocery store to buy food to consume, it's extensively labeled.
You know how many calories it has, how much fat it contains -- and yet when we consume information, we have no labels whatsoever.
What is contained in this information?
Is the source credible?
Where is this information gathered from?
We have none of that information when we are consuming information.
That is a potential avenue, but it comes with its challenges.
For instance, who gets to decide, in society, what's true and what's false?
Is it the governments?
Is it Facebook?
Is it an independent consortium of fact-checkers?
And who's checking the fact-checkers?
Another potential avenue is incentives.
We know that during the US presidential election there was a wave of misinformation that came from Macedonia that didn't have any political motive but instead had an economic motive.
And this economic motive existed, because false news travels so much farther, faster and more deeply than the truth, and you can earn advertising dollars as you garner eyeballs and attention with this type of information.
But if we can depress the spread of this information, perhaps it would reduce the economic incentive to produce it at all in the first place.
Third, we can think about regulation, and certainly, we should think about this option.
In the United States, currently, we are exploring what might happen if Facebook and others are regulated.
While we should consider things like regulating political speech, labeling the fact that it's political speech, making sure foreign actors can't fund political speech, it also has its own dangers.
For instance, Malaysia just instituted a six-year prison sentence for anyone found spreading misinformation.

