We asked people in England, Australia, the U.S. -- very similar answers.
We even asked different departments of a university.
We went to Harvard and we checked almost every department, and in fact, from Harvard Business School, where a few people wanted the wealthy to have more and the to have less, the similarity was astonishing.
I know some of you went to Harvard Business School.
We also asked this question about something else.
We asked, what about the ratio of CEO pay to unskilled workers?
So you can see what people think is the ratio, and then we can ask the question, what do they think should be the ratio?
And then we can ask, what is reality?
What is reality?
And you could say, well, it's not that bad, right?
The red and the yellow are not that different.
But the fact is, it's because I didn't draw them on the same scale.
It's hard to see, there's yellow and blue in there.
So what about other outcomes of wealth?
Wealth is not just about wealth.
We asked, what about things like health?
What about availability of prescription medication?
What about life expectancy?
What about life expectancy of infants?
How do we want this to be distributed?
What about education for young people?
And for older people?
And across all of those things, what we learned was that people don't like inequality of wealth, but there's other things where inequality, which is an outcome of wealth, is even more aversive to them: for example, inequality in health or education.
We also learned that people are particularly open to changes in equality when it comes to people who have less agency -- basically, young kids and babies, because we don't think of them as responsible for their situation.
So what are some lessons from this?
We have two gaps: We have a knowledge gap and we have a desirability gap And the knowledge gap is something that we think about, how do we educate people?
How do we get people to think differently about inequality and the consequences of inequality in terms of health, education, jealousy, crime rate, and so on?
Then we have the desirability gap.
How do we get people to think differently about what we really want?
You see, the Rawls definition, the Rawls way of looking at the world, the blind tasting approach, takes our selfish motivation out of the picture.
How do we implement that to a higher degree on a more extensive scale?
And finally, we also have an action gap.
How do we take these things and actually do something about it?
I think part of the answer is to think about people like young kids and babies that don't have much agency, because people seem to be more willing to do this.
To summarize, I would say, next time you go to drink beer or wine, first of all, think about, what is it in your experience that is real, and what is it in your experience that is a placebo effect coming from expectations?
And then think about what it also means for other decisions in your life, and hopefully also for policy questions that affect all of us.
Thanks a lot.
(Applause)
An 18-year-old, African-American male joined the United States Air Force and was assigned to Mountain Home Air Force Base and was a part of the air police squadron.
Upon first arriving there, the first goal that I had was for me to identify an apartment, so I could bring my wife and my new baby, Melanie, out to join me in Idaho.
I immediately went to the personnel office, and talking with the guys in personnel, they said, "Hey, no problem finding an apartment in Mountain Home, Idaho.
The people down there love us because they know if they have an airman who is coming in to rent one of their apartments, they'll always get their money."
And that was a really important thing.
He said, "So here is a list of people that you can call, and then they will then allow you to select the apartment that you want."
So I got the list; I made the call.
The lady answered on the other end and I told her what I wanted.
She said, "Oh, great you called.
We have four or five apartments available right now."
She said, "Do you want a one-bedroom or two-bedroom?"
Then she said, "Let's not talk about that.
Just come on down, select the apartment that you want.
We'll sign the contract and you'll have keys in your hand to get your family out here right away."
So I was excited.
I jumped in my car.
I went downtown and knocked on the door.
When I knocked on the door, the woman came to the door, and she looked at me, and she said, "Can I help you?"
I said, "Yes, I'm the person who called about the apartments.
I was just coming down to make my selection."
She said, "You know what?
I'm really sorry, but my husband rented those apartments and didn't tell me about them."
I said, "You mean he rented all five of them in one hour?"
She didn't give me a response, and what she said was this: She said, "Why don't you leave your number, and if we have some openings, I'll give you a call?"
Needless to say, I did not get a call from her.
Nor did I get any responses from the other people that they gave me on the list where I could get apartments.
So as a result of that, and feeling rejected, I went back to the base, and I talked to the squadron commander.
His name was McDow, Major McDow.
I said, "Major McDow, I need your help."
I told him what happened, and here's what he said to me: He said, "James, I would love to help you.
But you know the problem: We can't make people rent to folks that they don't want to rent to.
And besides, we have a great relationship with people in the community and we really don't want to damage that."
He said, "So maybe this is what you should do.
Why don't you let your family stay home, because you do know that you get a 30-day leave.
So once a year, you can go home to your family, spend 30 days and then come on back."
Needless to say, that didn't resonate for me.
So after leaving him, I went back to personnel, and talking to the clerk, he said, "Jim, I think I have a solution for you.
There's an airman who is leaving and he has a trailer.
If you noticed, in Mountain Home, there are trailer parks and trailers all over the place.
You can buy his trailer, and you'd probably get a really good deal because he wants to get out of town as soon as possible.
And that would take care of your problem, and that would provide the solution for you."
So I immediately jumped in my car, went downtown, saw the trailer -- it was a small trailer, but under the circumstances, I figured that was the best thing that I could do.
So I bought the trailer.
And then I asked him, "Can I just leave the trailer here, and that would take care of all my problems, I wouldn't have to find another trailer park?"
He said, "Before I say yes to that, I need to check with management."
So I get back to the base, he called me back and management said, "No, you can't leave the trailer here because we had promised that slot to some other people."
And that was strange to me because there were several other slots that were open, but it just so happened that he had promised that slot to someone else.
So, what I did -- and he said, "You shouldn't worry, Jim, because there are a lot of trailer parks."
So I put out another exhaustive list of going to trailer parks.
I went to one after another, after another.
And I got the same kind of rejection there that I received when I was looking for the apartment.
And as a result, the kind of comments that they made to me, in addition to saying that they didn't have any slots open, one person said, "Jim, the reason why we can't rent to you, we already have a Negro family in the trailer park."
He said, "And it's not me, because I like you people."
(Laughs) And that's what I did, too.
I chuckled, too.
He said, "But here's the problem: If I let you in, the other tenants will move out and I can't afford to take that kind of a hit."
He said, "I just can't rent to you."
Even though that was discouraging, it didn't stop me.
I kept looking, and I looked at the far end of the town in Mountain Home, and there was a small trailer park.
I mean, a really small trailer park.
It didn't have any paved roads in it, it didn't have the concrete slabs, it didn't have fencing to portion off your trailer slot from other trailer slots.
It didn't have a laundry facility.
But the conclusion I reached at that moment was that I didn't have a lot of other options.
So I called my wife, and I said, "We're going to make this one work."
And we moved into it and we became homeowners in Mountain Home, Idaho.
And of course, eventually things settled down.
Four years after that, I received papers to move from Mountain Home, Idaho to a place called Goose Bay, Labrador.
We won't even talk about that.
It was another great location.
(Laughter) So my challenge then was to get my family from Mountain Home, Idaho to Sharon, Pennsylvania.
That wasn't a problem because we had just purchased a brand-new automobile.
My mother called and said she'll fly out.
She'll be with us as we drive, she'll help us manage the children.
So she came out, her and Alice put a lot of food together for the trip.
That morning, we left at about 5 a.m.
Great trip, having a great time, good conversation.
Somewhere around 6:30, 7 o'clock, we got a little bit tired, and we said, "Why don't we get a motel so that we can rest and then have an early start in the morning?"
So we were looking at a number of the motels as we drove down the road, and we saw one, it was a great big, bright flashing light that said, "Vacancies, Vacancies, Vacanies."
So we stopped in.
They were in the parking lot, I went inside.
When I walked inside, the lady was just finishing up one contract with some folks, some other people were coming in behind me.
And so I walked to the counter, and she said, "How can I help you?"
I said, "I would like to get a motel for the evening for my family."
She said, "You know, I'm really sorry, I just rented the last one.
We will not have any more until the morning."
She said, "But if you go down the road about an hour, 45 minutes, there's another trailer park down there."
I said, "Yeah, but you still have the 'Vacancies' light on, and it's flashing."
She said, "Oh, I forgot."
And she reached over and turned the light off.
She looked at me and I looked at her.
There were other people in the room.
She kind of looked at them.
No one said anything.
So I just got the hint and I left, and went outside to the parking lot.
And I told my mother and I told my wife and also Melanie, and I said, "It looks like we're going to have to drive a little bit further down the road to be able to sleep tonight."
And we did drive down the road, but just before we took off and pulled out of the parking lot, guess what happened?
The light came back on.
And it said, "Vacancies, Vacancies, Vacancies."
We were able to find a nice place.
It wasn't our preference, but it was secure and it was clean.
And so we had a great sleep that night.
The piece that's important about that is that we had similar kinds of experiences from Idaho all the way through to Pennsylvania, where we were rejected from hotels, motels and restaurants.
But we made it to Pennsylvania.
We got the family settled.
Everyone was glad to see the kids.
I jumped on a plane and shot off to Goose Bay, Labrador, which is another story, right?
(Laughter) Here it is, 53 years later, I now have nine grandchildren, two great-grandchildren.
Five of the grandchildren are boys.
I have master's, Ph.D., undergrad, one in medical school.
I have a couple that are trending.
They're almost there but not quite.
(Laughter) I have one who has been in college now for eight years.
(Laughter) He doesn't have a degree yet, but he wants to be a comedian.
So we're just trying to get him to stay in school.
Because you never know, just because you're funny at home, does not make you a comedian, right?
(Laughter) But the thing about it, they're all good kids -- no drugs, no babies in high school, no crime.
So with that being the backdrop, I was sitting in my TV room watching TV, and they were talking about Ferguson and all the hullabaloo that was going on.
And all of a sudden, one of the news commentators got on the air and she said, "In the last three months, eight unarmed African-American males have been killed by police, white homeowners, or white citizens."
For some reason, at that moment it just all hit me.
I said, "What is it?
It is so insane.
What is the hatred that's causing people to do these kinds of things?"
Just then, one of my grandsons called.
He said, "Granddad, did you hear what they said on TV?"
I said, "Yes, I did."
He said, "I'm just so confused.
We do everything we do, but it seems that driving while black, walking while black, talking while black, it's just dangerous.
What can we do?
We do everything that you told us to do.
When stopped by the police, we place both hands on the steering wheel at the 12 o'clock position.
If asked to get identification, we tell them, 'I am slowly reaching over into the glove compartment to get my I.D.'
When pulled out of the car to be searched, when laid on the ground to be searched, when our trunks are opened to be searched, we don't push back, we don't challenge because we know, you've told us, 'Don't you challenge the police.
After it's over, call us and we'll be the ones to challenge."
He said, "And this is the piece that really bugs me: Our white friends, our buddies, we kind of hang together.
When they hear about these kinds of things happening to us, they say, 'Why do you take it?
You need to push back.
You need to challenge.
You need to ask them for their identification.'"
And here's what the boys have been taught to tell them: "We know that you can do that, but please do not do that while we're in the car because the consequences for you are significantly different than the consequences for us."
And so as a grandparent, what do I tell my grandsons?
How do I keep them safe?
How do I keep them alive?
As a result of this, people have come to me and said, "Jim, are you angry?"
And my response to that is this: "I don't have the luxury of being angry, and I also know the consequences of being enraged."
So therefore, the only thing that I can do is take my collective intellect and my energy and my ideas and my experiences and dedicate myself to challenge, at any point in time, anything that looks like it might be racist.
So the first thing I have to do is to educate, the second thing I have to do is to unveil racism, and the last thing I need to do is do everything within my power to eradicate racism in my lifetime by any means necessary.
The second thing I do is this: I want to appeal to Americans.
I want to appeal to their humanity, to their dignity, to their civic pride and ownership to be able to not react to these heinous crimes in an adverse manner.
But instead, to elevate your level of societal knowledge, your level of societal awareness and societal consciousness to then collectively come together, all of us come together, to make sure that we speak out against and we challenge any kind of insanity, any kind of insanity that makes it okay to kill unarmed people, regardless of their ethnicity, regardless of their race, regardless of their diversity makeup.
We have to challenge that.
It doesn't make any sense.
The only way I think we can do that is through a collective.
We need to have black and white and Asian and Hispanic just to step forward and say, "We are not going to accept that kind of behavior anymore."
I'm a process engineer, I know all about boilers and incinerators and fabric filters, and cyclones, and things like that.
But I also have Marfan syndrome.
This is an inherited disorder.
And in 1992, I participated in a genetic study, and found to my horror, as you can see from the slide, that my ascending aorta was not in the normal range, the green line at the bottom.
Everyone in here will be between 3.2-3.6, and I was already up at 4.4.
And as you can see, my aorta dilated progressively, and I got closer and closer to the point where surgery was going to be necessary.
The surgery on offer was pretty gruesome.
Anesthetize you, open your chest, put you on an artificial heart and lung machine, drop your body temperature to about 18 centigrade, stop your heart, cut the aorta out, replace it with a plastic valve and a plastic aorta.
And most importantly, commit you to a lifetime of anticoagulation therapy.
Normally, warfarin.
The thought of the surgery was not attractive.
The thought of the warfarin was really quite frightening.
So I said to myself, "I'm an engineer, I'm in R&amp;D, this is just a plumbing problem."
"I can do this, I can change this."
So I set out to change the entire treatment for aortic dilation.
The project aim is really quite simple.
The only real problem with the ascending aorta in people with Marfan syndrome is that it lacks some tensile strength.
So, the possibility exists to simply externally wrap the pipe, and it would remain stable and operate quite happily.
If your high-pressure hose pipe or hydraulic line bulges a little, you just wrap some tape around it, it really is that simple.
In concept, though not in execution.
The great advantage of an external support, for me, was that I could retain all of my own bits, all of my own endothelium and valves, and not need any anticoagulation therapy.
So, where do we start?
This is a sagittal slice through me.
In the middle, you can see that little structure squeezing out, that's the left ventricle, pushing blood out through the aortic valve.
You can see two of the leaflets of the aortic valve working there.
Up into the ascending aorta.
And it's that part, the ascending aorta, which dilates and ultimately bursts, which of course is fatal.
We started by organizing image acquisition from magnetic resonance and CT imaging machines, from which to make a model of the patient's aorta.
This is a model of my aorta.
I've got a real one in my pocket, if anyone would like to look at it, and play with it.
(Laughter) You can see it's quite a complex structure.
It has a funny tri-lobal shape at the bottom, which contains the aortic valve.
It then comes back into a round form, and then tapers and curves off.
It's quite a difficult structure to produce.
This is a sort of CAD model of me, and this is one of the later CAD models.
We went through an iterative process of producing better and better models.
When we produced that model, we turned it into a solid, plastic model, as you can see, using a rapid prototyping technique, another engineering technique.
We then used that former to manufacture a perfectly bespoke porous textile mesh, which takes the shape of the former and perfectly fits the aorta.
So this is absolutely personalized medicine at its best, really.

