I feel sad about professional disappointments, about damaged relationships, about global warming.
Those are the things that I feel sad about now.
And I said to myself, well, what is the conclusion?
How did those people who have better lives even with bigger depression manage to get through?
What is the mechanism of resilience?
And what I came up with over time was that the people who deny their experience, and say, "I was depressed a long time ago, I never want to think about it again, I'm not going to look at it and I'm just going to get on with my life," ironically, those are the people who are most enslaved by what they have.
Shutting out the depression strengthens it.
While you hide from it, it grows.
And the people who do better are the ones who are able to tolerate the fact that they have this condition.
Those who can tolerate their depression are the ones who achieve resilience.
So Frank Russakoff said to me, "If I had a do-over, I suppose I wouldn't do it this way, but in a strange way, I'm grateful for what I've experienced.
I'm glad to have been in the hospital 40 times.
It taught me so much about love, and my relationship with my parents and my doctors has been so precious to me, and will be always."
And Maggie Robbins said, "I used to volunteer in an AIDS clinic, and I would just talk and talk and talk, and the people I was dealing with weren't very responsive, and I thought, 'That's not very friendly or helpful of them.'"
(Laughter) "And then I realized, I realized that they weren't going to do more than make those first few minutes of small talk.
It was simply going to be an occasion where I didn't have AIDS and I wasn't dying, but could tolerate the fact that they did and they were.
Our needs are our greatest assets.
It turns out I've learned to give all the things I need."
Valuing one's depression does not prevent a relapse, but it may make the prospect of relapse and even relapse itself easier to tolerate.
The question is not so much of finding great meaning and deciding your depression has been very meaningful.
It's of seeking that meaning and thinking, when it comes again, "This will be hellish, but I will learn something from it."
I have learned in my own depression how big an emotion can be, how it can be more real than facts, and I have found that that experience has allowed me to experience positive emotion in a more intense and more focused way.
The opposite of depression is not happiness, but vitality, and these days, my life is vital, even on the days when I'm sad.
I felt that funeral in my brain, and I sat next to the colossus at the edge of the world, and I have discovered something inside of myself that I would have to call a soul that I had never formulated until that day 20 years ago when hell came to pay me a surprise visit.
I think that while I hated being depressed and would hate to be depressed again, I've found a way to love my depression.
I love it because it has forced me to find and cling to joy.
I love it because each day I decide, sometimes gamely, and sometimes against the moment's reason, to cleave to the reasons for living.
And that, I think, is a highly privileged rapture.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
I want you to imagine that you are a Child Protective Services worker.
And you have to respond to a report of child abuse.
You walk into a home, unannounced, unexpected, certainly uninvited.
The first thing you see is a mattress in the middle of the room, on the floor.
Three kids lying on it, asleep.
There's a small table nearby with a couple of ashtrays, empty beer cans.
Large rat traps are set in the corner, not too far from where the kids lie asleep.
So you make a note.
A part of your job is walking through the entire home.
So you start with the kitchen, where there's very little food.
You notice another mattress in the bedroom, on the floor, that the mother shares with her infant child.
Now, generally, at this point, two things may happen.
The children are deemed unsafe and removed from the home, and placed in state custody for a specified period of time.
Or the children remain with their family and the child welfare system provides help and support.
When I was a Child Protective Services worker, I saw things like this all the time.
Some far better, some far worse.
I asked you to imagine yourself in that home, because I wonder what crossed your mind.
What guides your decisions?
What's going to impact your opinion of that family?
What race, ethnicity, did you think the family was?
I want you to realize that if those children were white, it is more likely that their family stays together after that visit.
Research done at the University of Pennsylvania found that white families, on average, have access to more help and more support from the child welfare system.
And their cases are less likely to go through a full investigation.
But on the other hand, if those kids are black, they are four times more likely to be removed, they spend longer periods of time in foster care, and it's harder to find them a stable foster placement.
Foster care is meant to be an immediate shelter of protection for kids who are at high risk.
But it's also a confusing and traumatic exit from the family.
Research done at the University of Minnesota found that kids who went through foster care had more behavioral problems and internalized issues than kids who remain with their families while receiving help and support.
The scenario I mentioned earlier is not uncommon.
A single mother, living in low-income housing with her four children.
And the rats make it almost impossible to keep food, let alone fresh food in the home.
Does that mother deserve to have her children taken from her?
Emma Ketteringham, a family court attorney, says that if you live in a poor neighborhood, then you better be a perfect parent.
She says that we place unfair, often unreachable standards on parents who are raising their kids with very little money.
And their neighborhood and ethnicity impact whether or not their kids are removed.
In the two years I spent on the front lines of child welfare, I made high-stakes decisions.
And I saw firsthand how my personal values impacted my work.
Now, as social work faculty at Florida State University, I lead an institute that curates the most innovative and effective child welfare research.
And research tells us that there are twice as many black kids in foster care, twenty-eight percent, than there are in the general population, 14 percent.
And although there are several reasons why, I want to discuss one reason today: implicit bias.
Let's start with "implicit."
It's subconscious, something you're not aware of.
Bias -- those stereotypes and attitudes that we all have about certain groups of people.
So, implicit bias is what lurks in the background of every decision that we make.
So how can we fix it?
I have a promising solution that I want to share.
Now, in almost every state, there are high numbers of black kids going into foster care.
But data revealed that Nassau County, a community in New York, had managed to decrease the number of black kids being removed.
And in 2016, I went into that community with my team and led a research study, discovering the use of blind removal meetings.
This is how it works.
A case worker responds to a report of child abuse.
They go out to the home, but before the children are removed, the case worker must come back to the office and present what they found.
But here's the distinction: When they present to the committee, they delete names, ethnicity, neighborhood, race, all identifiable information.
They focus on what happened, family strength, relevant history and the parents' ability to protect the child.
With that information, the committee makes a recommendation, never knowing the race of the family.
Blind removals have made a drastic impact in that community.
In 2011, 57 percent of the kids going into foster care were black.
But after five years of blind removals, that is down to 21 percent.
(Applause) Here's what we learned from talking to some of the case workers.
"When a family has a history with the department, many of us hold that history against them, even if they're trying to do things differently."
"When I see a case from a certain apartment building, neighborhood or zip code, I just automatically think the worst."
"Child welfare is very subjective, because it's an emotional field.
There's no one who doesn't have emotions around this work.
And it's very hard to leave all of your stuff at the door when you do this work.
So let's take the subjectivity of race and neighborhood out of it, and you might get different outcomes."
Blind removals seem to be bringing us closer to solving the problem of implicit bias in foster-care decisions.
My next step is figuring out how to use artificial intelligence and machine learning to bring this project to scale and make it more accessible to other states.
I know we can transform child welfare.
We can hold organizations accountable to developing the social consciousness of their employees.
We can hold ourselves accountable to making sure our decisions are driven by ethics and safety.
Let's imagine a child welfare system that focuses on partnering with parents, empowering families, and no longer see poverty as failure.
Let's work together to build a system that wants to make families stronger instead of pulling them apart.
Thank you.
(Applause) (Cheering)
What does a working mother look like?
If you ask the Internet, this is what you'll be told.
Never mind that this is what you'll actually produce if you attempt to work at a computer with a baby on your lap.
(Laughter) But no, this isn't a working mother.
You'll notice a theme in these photos.
We'll look at a lot of them.
That theme is amazing natural lighting, which, as we all know, is the hallmark of every American workplace.
There are thousands of images like these.
Just put the term "working mother" into any Google image search engine, stock photo site.
They're all over the Internet, they're topping blog posts and news pieces, and I've become kind of obsessed with them and the lie that they tell us and the comfort that they give us, that when it comes to new working motherhood in America, everything's fine.
But it's not fine.
As a country, we are sending millions of women back to work every year, incredibly and kind of horrifically soon after they give birth.
That's a moral problem but today I'm also going to tell you why it's an economic problem.
I got so annoyed and obsessed with the unreality of these images, which look nothing like my life, that I recently decided to shoot and star in a parody series of stock photos that I hoped the world would start to use just showing the really awkward reality of going back to work when your baby's food source is attached to your body.
I'm just going to show you two of them.
(Laughter) Nothing says "Give that girl a promotion" like leaking breast milk through your dress during a presentation.
You'll notice that there's no baby in this photo, because that's not how this works, not for most working mothers.
Did you know, and this will ruin your day, that every time a toilet is flushed, its contents are aerosolized and they'll stay airborne for hours?
And yet, for many new working mothers, this is the only place during the day that they can find to make food for their newborn babies.
I put these things, a whole dozen of them, into the world.
I wanted to make a point.
I didn't know what I was also doing was opening a door, because now, total strangers from all walks of life write to me all the time just to tell me what it's like for them to go back to work within days or weeks of having a baby.
I'm going to share 10 of their stories with you today.
They are totally real, some of them are very raw, and not one of them looks anything like this.
Here's the first.
"I was an active duty service member at a federal prison.
I returned to work after the maximum allowed eight weeks for my C-section.
A male coworker was annoyed that I had been out on 'vacation,' so he intentionally opened the door on me while I was pumping breast milk and stood in the doorway with inmates in the hallway."
Most of the stories that these women, total strangers, send to me now, are not actually even about breastfeeding.
A woman wrote to me to say, "I gave birth to twins and went back to work after seven unpaid weeks.
Emotionally, I was a wreck.
Physically, I had a severe hemorrhage during labor, and major tearing, so I could barely get up, sit or walk.
My employer told me I wasn't allowed to use my available vacation days because it was budget season."
I've come to believe that we can't look situations like these in the eye because then we'd be horrified, and if we get horrified then we have to do something about it.
So we choose to look at, and believe, this image.
I don't really know what's going on in this picture, because I find it weird and slightly creepy.
(Laughter) Like, what is she doing?
But I know what it tells us.
It tells us that everything's fine.
This working mother, all working mothers and all of their babies, are fine.
There's nothing to see here.
And anyway, women have made a choice, so none of it's even our problem.
I want to break this choice thing down into two parts.
The first choice says that women have chosen to work.
So, that's not true.
Today in America, women make up 47 percent of the workforce, and in 40 percent of American households a woman is the sole or primary breadwinner.
Our paid work is a part, a huge part, of the engine of this economy, and it is essential for the engines of our families.
On a national level, our paid work is not optional.
Choice number two says that women are choosing to have babies, so women alone should bear the consequences of those choices.
You know, that's one of those things that when you hear it in passing, can sound correct.
I didn't make you have a baby.
I certainly wasn't there when that happened.
But that stance ignores a fundamental truth, which is that our procreation on a national scale is not optional.
The babies that women, many of them working women, are having today, will one day fill our workforce, protect our shores, make up our tax base.
Our procreation on a national scale is not optional.
These aren't choices.
We need women to work.
We need working women to have babies.
So we should make doing those things at the same time at least palatable, right?
OK, this is pop quiz time: what percentage of working women in America do you think have no access to paid maternity leave?
88 percent.
88 percent of working mothers will not get one minute of paid leave after they have a baby.
So now you're thinking about unpaid leave.
It exists in America.
It's called FMLA.
It does not work.
Because of the way it's structured, all kinds of exceptions, half of new mothers are ineligible for it.
Here's what that looks like.
"We adopted our son.
When I got the call, the day he was born, I had to take off work.
I had not been there long enough to qualify for FMLA, so I wasn't eligible for unpaid leave.
When I took time off to meet my newborn son, I lost my job."
These corporate stock photos hide another reality, another layer.
Of those who do have access to just that unpaid leave, most women can't afford to take much of it at all.
A nurse told me, "I didn't qualify for short-term disability because my pregnancy was considered a preexisting condition.
We used up all of our tax returns and half of our savings during my six unpaid weeks.
We just couldn't manage any longer.
Physically it was hard, but emotionally it was worse.
I struggled for months being away from my son."
So this decision to go back to work so early, it's a rational economic decision driven by family finances, but it's often physically horrific because putting a human into the world is messy.
A waitress told me, "With my first baby, I was back at work five weeks postpartum.
With my second, I had to have major surgery after giving birth, so I waited until six weeks to go back.
I had third degree tears."
23 percent of new working mothers in America will be back on the job within two weeks of giving birth.
"I worked as a bartender and cook, average of 75 hours a week while pregnant.
I had to return to work before my baby was a month old, working 60 hours a week.
One of my coworkers was only able to afford 10 days off with her baby."
Of course, this isn't just a scenario with economic and physical implications.
Childbirth is, and always will be, an enormous psychological event.
A teacher told me, "I returned to work eight weeks after my son was born.
I already suffer from anxiety, but the panic attacks I had prior to returning to work were unbearable."
Statistically speaking, the shorter a woman's leave after having a baby, the more likely she will be to suffer from postpartum mood disorders like depression and anxiety, and among many potential consequences of those disorders, suicide is the second most common cause of death in a woman's first year postpartum.
Heads up that this next story -- I've never met this woman, but I find it hard to get through.
"I feel tremendous grief and rage that I lost an essential, irreplaceable and formative time with my son.
Labor and delivery left me feeling absolutely broken.
For months, all I remember is the screaming: colic, they said.
On the inside, I was drowning.
Every morning, I asked myself how much longer I could do it.
I was allowed to bring my baby to work.
I closed my office door while I rocked and shushed and begged him to stop screaming so I wouldn't get in trouble.
I hid behind that office door every damn day and cried while he screamed.
I cried in the bathroom while I washed out the pump equipment.
Every day, I cried all the way to work and all the way home again.
I promised my boss that the work I didn't get done during the day, I'd make up at night from home.
I thought, there's just something wrong with me that I can't swing this."
So those are the mothers.
What of the babies?
As a country, do we care about the millions of babies born every year to working mothers?
I say we don't, not until they're of working and tax-paying and military-serving age.
We tell them we'll see them in 18 years, and getting there is kind of on them.
One of the reasons I know this is that babies whose mothers have 12 or more weeks at home with them are more likely to get their vaccinations and their well checks in their first year, so those babies are more protected from deadly and disabling diseases.
But those things are hidden behind images like this.
America has a message for new mothers who work and for their babies.
Whatever time you get together, you should be grateful for it, and you're an inconvenience to the economy and to your employers.
That narrative of gratitude runs through a lot of the stories I hear.
A woman told me, "I went back at eight weeks after my C-section because my husband was out of work.
Without me, my daughter had failure to thrive.
She wouldn't take a bottle.
She started losing weight.
Thankfully, my manager was very understanding.
He let my mom bring my baby, who was on oxygen and a monitor, four times a shift so I could nurse her."

