And you'll see, that's stability and control -- there's no wires there or anything -- that's a combination of us refining the technology, including with a Tupperware box on the back for the electronics and actually learning the balance and control.
I'm now going to save your ears for the next short piece and talk over it.
After a while, the jet engine noise is a bit annoying.
This is only a few weeks ago.
You can see the stability and control is really quite nice, and I'd like to think this somewhat validates that starting hypothesis, that the human mind and body, if properly augmented in that way, can achieve some pretty cool stuff.
I mean, like I said: I'm not thinking about where I'm moving my arms at that stage.
I'm looking at the objective of where I want to get to, and a bit like riding a bike, my arms are just doing their thing.
It's a very strange experience.
So where is all this headed?
I'll talk over this landing -- I think I land in this one.
Well, I don't think anybody's going to go down to Walmart or take the kids to school in any of this stuff for a while, but the team at Gravity are building some awesome technology that's going to make this look like child's play.
We're working on some things that will seek to bring this unusual experience of flight to a wider audience, beyond the events and displays we're doing.
We're even starting to look for pilots two and three, if there's any volunteers.
I've got this vision.
It sounds audacious, but let's just stick it out there, that one day maybe we can rise up above a beach, fly up and down the coastline of it, rise up a bit higher, with some of the safety kit we're working on to make this achievable.
Then over the horizon comes a Hercules with the ramp down.
As it comes past, you start picking up speed and see if we can intercept -- from the rear, not the front, that would be a mistake -- and then try and land in the back.
And as I say, that's a little way off at the moment.
But this is also, if I take a big step back from this, this is also a very personal journey for me.
Back to that lovely photo, or photo in a picture.
Sadly, my father took his own life when I was 15, and left an awful lot of unfulfilled ambition.
He was a wonderful inventor, a maverick creator.
And I'd just like to think, if it was possible, if he was looking down, he would be -- he'd certainly be smiling at some of the things we've done here, I think.
So, it's a tribute to him.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) (Voice-over) Richard Browning: I'm probably more nervous about doing the demo after this.
I've got a lot of things to get done today.
Worst-case scenario, we don't get a clean start.
Or we get an unplanned failure while I'm actually flying around.
This is why we keep it very low, so the worst is I just look like an idiot and fall on my rear, as I said.
So you can all enjoy that if that happens.
(Music) (Jet engine accelerates) (Cheers)
When ultraviolet sunlight hits our skin, it affects each of us a little differently.
Depending on skin color, it will take only minutes of exposure to turn one person beetroot-pink, while another requires hours to experience the slightest change.
So what's to account for that difference and how did our skin come to take on so many different hues to begin with?
Whatever the color, our skin tells an epic tale of human intrepidness and adaptability, revealing its variance to be a function of biology.
It all centers around melanin, the pigment that gives skin and hair its color.
This ingredient comes from skin cells called melanocytes and takes two basic forms.
There's eumelanin, which gives rise to a range of brown skin tones, as well as black, brown, and blond hair, and pheomelanin, which causes the reddish browns of freckles and red hair.
But humans weren't always like this.
Our varying skin tones were formed by an evolutionary process driven by the Sun.
In began some 50,000 years ago when our ancestors migrated north from Africa and into Europe and Asia.
These ancient humans lived between the Equator and the Tropic of Capricorn, a region saturated by the Sun's UV-carrying rays.
When skin is exposed to UV for long periods of time, the UV light damages the DNA within our cells, and skin starts to burn.
If that damage is severe enough, the cells mutations can lead to melanoma, a deadly cancer that forms in the skin's melanocytes.
Sunscreen as we know it today didn't exist 50,000 years ago.
So how did our ancestors cope with this onslaught of UV?
The key to survival lay in their own personal sunscreen manufactured beneath the skin: melanin.
The type and amount of melanin in your skin determines whether you'll be more or less protected from the sun.
This comes down to the skin's response as sunlight strikes it.
When it's exposed to UV light, that triggers special light-sensitive receptors called rhodopsin, which stimulate the production of melanin to shield cells from damage.
For light-skin people, that extra melanin darkens their skin and produces a tan.
Over the course of generations, humans living at the Sun-saturated latitudes in Africa adapted to have a higher melanin production threshold and more eumelanin, giving skin a darker tone.
This built-in sun shield helped protect them from melanoma, likely making them evolutionarily fitter and capable of passing this useful trait on to new generations.
But soon, some of our Sun-adapted ancestors migrated northward out of the tropical zone, spreading far and wide across the Earth.
The further north they traveled, the less direct sunshine they saw.
This was a problem because although UV light can damage skin, it also has an important parallel benefit.
UV helps our bodies produce vitamin D, an ingredient that strengthens bones and lets us absorb vital minerals, like calcium, iron, magnesium, phosphate, and zinc.
Without it, humans experience serious fatigue and weakened bones that can cause a condition known as rickets.
For humans whose dark skin effectively blocked whatever sunlight there was, vitamin D deficiency would have posed a serious threat in the north.
But some of them happened to produce less melanin.
They were exposed to small enough amounts of light that melanoma was less likely, and their lighter skin better absorbed the UV light.
So they benefited from vitamin D, developed strong bones, and survived well enough to produce healthy offspring.
Over many generations of selection, skin color in those regions gradually lightened.
As a result of our ancestor's adaptability, today the planet is full of people with a vast palette of skin colors, typically, darker eumelanin-rich skin in the hot, sunny band around the Equator, and increasingly lighter pheomelanin-rich skin shades fanning outwards as the sunshine dwindles.
Therefore, skin color is little more than an adaptive trait for living on a rock that orbits the Sun.
It may absorb light, but it certainly does not reflect character.
Here are two reasons companies fail: they only do more of the same, or they only do what's new.
To me the real, real solution to quality growth is figuring out the balance between two activities: exploration and exploitation.
Both are necessary, but it can be too much of a good thing.
Consider Facit.
I'm actually old enough to remember them.
Facit was a fantastic company.
They were born deep in the Swedish forest, and they made the best mechanical calculators in the world.
Everybody used them.
And what did Facit do when the electronic calculator came along?
They continued doing exactly the same.
In six months, they went from maximum revenue ...
and they were gone.
Gone.
To me, the irony about the Facit story is hearing about the Facit engineers, who had bought cheap, small electronic calculators in Japan that they used to double-check their calculators.
(Laughter) Facit did too much exploitation.
But exploration can go wild, too.
A few years back, I worked closely alongside a European biotech company.
Let's call them OncoSearch.
The company was brilliant.
They had applications that promised to diagnose, even cure, certain forms of blood cancer.
Every day was about creating something new.
They were extremely innovative, and the mantra was, "When we only get it right," or even, "We want it perfect."
The sad thing is, before they became perfect -- even good enough -- they became obsolete.
OncoSearch did too much exploration.
I first heard about exploration and exploitation about 15 years ago, when I worked as a visiting scholar at Stanford University.
The founder of the idea is Jim March.
And to me the power of the idea is its practicality.
Exploration.
Exploration is about coming up with what's new.
It's about search, it's about discovery, it's about new products, it's about new innovations.
It's about changing our frontiers.
Our heroes are people who have done exploration: Madame Curie, Picasso, Neil Armstrong, Sir Edmund Hillary, etc.
I come from Norway; all our heroes are explorers, and they deserve to be.
We all know that exploration is risky.
We don't know the answers, we don't know if we're going to find them, and we know that the risks are high.
Exploitation is the opposite.
Exploitation is taking the knowledge we have and making good, better.
Exploitation is about making our trains run on time.
It's about making good products faster and cheaper.
Exploitation is not risky -- in the short term.
But if we only exploit, it's very risky in the long term.
And I think we all have memories of the famous pop groups who keep singing the same songs again and again, until they become obsolete or even pathetic.
That's the risk of exploitation.
So if we take a long-term perspective, we explore.
If we take a short-term perspective, we exploit.
Small children, they explore all day.
All day it's about exploration.
As we grow older, we explore less because we have more knowledge to exploit on.
The same goes for companies.
Companies become, by nature, less innovative as they become more competent.
And this is, of course, a big worry to CEOs.
And I hear very often questions phrased in different ways.
For example, "How can I both effectively run and reinvent my company?"
Or, "How can I make sure that our company changes before we become obsolete or are hit by a crisis?"
So, doing one well is difficult.
Doing both well as the same time is art -- pushing both exploration and exploitation.
So one thing we've found is only about two percent of companies are able to effectively explore and exploit at the same time, in parallel.
But when they do, the payoffs are huge.
So we have lots of great examples.
We have Nestlé creating Nespresso, we have Lego going into animated films, Toyota creating the hybrids, Unilever pushing into sustainability -- there are lots of examples, and the benefits are huge.
Why is balancing so difficult?
I think it's difficult because there are so many traps that keep us where we are.
So I'll talk about two, but there are many.
So let's talk about the perpetual search trap.
We discover something, but we don't have the patience or the persistence to get at it and make it work.
So instead of staying with it, we create something new.
But the same goes for that, then we're in the vicious circle of actually coming up with ideas but being frustrated.
OncoSearch was a good example.
A famous example is, of course, Xerox.
But we don't only see this in companies.
We see this in the public sector as well.
We all know that any kind of effective reform of education, research, health care, even defense, takes 10, 15, maybe 20 years to work.
But still, we change much more often.
We really don't give them the chance.
Another trap is the success trap.
Facit fell into the success trap.
They literally held the future in their hands, but they couldn't see it.
They were simply so good at making what they loved doing, that they wouldn't change.
We are like that, too.
When we know something well, it's difficult to change.
Bill Gates has said: "Success is a lousy teacher.
It seduces us into thinking we cannot fail."
That's the challenge with success.
So I think there are some lessons, and I think they apply to us.
And they apply to our companies.
The first lesson is: get ahead of the crisis.
And any company that's able to innovate is actually able to also buy an insurance in the future.
Netflix -- they could so easily have been content with earlier generations of distribution, but they always -- and I think they will always -- keep pushing for the next battle.
I see other companies that say, "I'll win the next innovation cycle, whatever it takes."
Second one: think in multiple time scales.
I'll share a chart with you, and I think it's a wonderful one.
Any company we look at, taking a one-year perspective and looking at the valuation of the company, innovation typically accounts for only about 30 percent.
So when we think one year, innovation isn't really that important.
Move ahead, take a 10-year perspective on the same company -- suddenly, innovation and ability to renew account for 70 percent.
But companies can't choose.
They need to fund the journey and lead the long term.
Third: invite talent.
I don't think it's possible for any of us to be able to balance exploration and exploitation by ourselves.
I think it's a team sport.
I think we need to allow challenging.
I think the mark of a great company is being open to be challenged, and the mark of a good corporate board is to constructively challenge.
I think that's also what good parenting is about.
Last one: be skeptical of success.
Maybe it's useful to think back at the old triumph marches in Rome, when the generals, after a big victory, were given their celebration.
Riding into Rome on the carriage, they always had a companion whispering in their ear, "Remember, you're only human."
So I hope I made the point: balancing exploration and exploitation has a huge payoff.
But it's difficult, and we need to be conscious.
I want to just point out two questions that I think are useful.
First question is, looking at your own company: In which areas do you see that the company is at the risk of falling into success traps, of just going on autopilot?
And what can you do to challenge?
Second question is: When did I explore something new last, and what kind of effect did it have on me?
Is that something I should do more of?
In my case, yes.
So let me leave you with this.
Whether you're an explorer by nature or whether you tend to exploit what you already know, don't forget: the beauty is in the balance.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I have a tough job to do.
You know, when I looked at the profile of the audience here, with their connotations and design, in all its forms, and with so much and so many people working on collaborative and networks, and so on, that I wanted to tell you, I wanted to build an argument for primary education in a very specific context.
In order to do that in 20 minutes, I have to bring out four ideas -- it's like four pieces of a puzzle.
And if I succeed in doing that, maybe you would go back with the thought that you could build on, and perhaps help me do my work.
The first piece of the puzzle is remoteness and the quality of education.
Now, by remoteness, I mean two or three different kinds of things.
Of course, remoteness in its normal sense, which means that as you go further and further away from an urban center, you get to remoter areas.
What happens to education?
The second, or a different kind of remoteness is that within the large metropolitan areas all over the world, you have pockets, like slums, or shantytowns, or poorer areas, which are socially and economically remote from the rest of the city, so it's us and them.
What happens to education in that context?
So keep both of those ideas of remoteness.
We made a guess.
The guess was that schools in remote areas do not have good enough teachers.
If they do have, they cannot retain those teachers.
They do not have good enough infrastructure.
And if they had some infrastructure, they have difficulty maintaining it.
But I wanted to check if this is true.
So what I did last year was we hired a car, looked up on Google, found a route into northern India from New Delhi which, you know, which did not cross any big cities or any big metropolitan centers.
Drove out about 300 kilometers, and wherever we found a school, administered a set of standard tests, and then took those test results and plotted them on a graph.
The graph was interesting, although you need to consider it carefully.
I mean, this is a very small sample; you should not generalize from it.
But it was quite obvious, quite clear, that for this particular route that I had taken, the remoter the school was, the worse its results seemed to be.
That seemed a little damning, and I tried to correlate it with things like infrastructure, or with the availability of electricity, and things like that.
To my surprise, it did not correlate.
It did not correlate with the size of classrooms.
It did not correlate with the quality of the infrastructure.
It did not correlate with the poverty levels.
It did not correlate.
But what happened was that when I administered a questionnaire to each of these schools, with one single question for the teachers -- which was, "Would you like to move to an urban, metropolitan area?" -- 69 percent of them said yes.
And as you can see from that, they say yes just a little bit out of Delhi, and they say no when you hit the rich suburbs of Delhi -- because, you know, those are relatively better off areas -- and then from 200 kilometers out of Delhi, the answer is consistently yes.
I would imagine that a teacher who comes or walks into class every day thinking that, I wish I was in some other school, probably has a deep impact on what happens to the results.
So it looked as though teacher motivation and teacher migration was a powerfully correlated thing with what was happening in primary schools, as opposed to whether the children have enough to eat, and whether they are packed tightly into classrooms and that sort of thing.
It appears that way.
When you take education and technology, then I find in the literature that, you know, things like websites, collaborative environments -- you've been listening to all that in the morning -- it's always piloted first in the best schools, the best urban schools, and, according to me, biases the result.
The literature -- one part of it, the scientific literature -- consistently blames ET as being over-hyped and under-performing.
The teachers always say, well, it's fine, but it's too expensive for what it does.
Because it's being piloted in a school where the students are already getting, let's say, 80 percent of whatever they could do.
You put in this new super-duper technology, and now they get 83 percent.
So the principal looks at it and says, 3 percent for 300,000 dollars?
Forget it.
If you took the same technology and piloted it into one of those remote schools, where the score was 30 percent, and, let's say, took that up to 40 percent -- that will be a completely different thing.
So the relative change that ET, Educational Technology, would make, would be far greater at the bottom of the pyramid than at the top, but we seem to be doing it the other way about.
So I came to this conclusion that ET should reach the underprivileged first, not the other way about.
And finally came the question of, how do you tackle teacher perception?
Whenever you go to a teacher and show them some technology, the teacher's first reaction is, you cannot replace a teacher with a machine -- it's impossible.

