I was working as a full time plus size model.
Back in Nebraska, I was known as the "Fat Model".
The girl who is pretty for a big girl.
I always hated answering that question: "What do you do for a living?"
I would see that person's eyebrow raise as I would reply: "I'm a model!"
I'd have to quickly qualify with: "Well, I'm a plus size model."
In fact, here is my very first editorial for YM Magazine.
And, you are reading it correctly, "cantaloupes-large breasts".
I was helping women across America at the age of 15 dress their big boobs.
But you know what the first thing that someone in middle school pointed out to me besides-- well, besides the obvious?
Was that fold above my knee.
That fat fold above my knee.
As a young model, my confidence was tugged at and pulled in all different directions.
I struggled to achieve true confidence.
I would go home and look in front of the mirror and only hate what I saw.
And to fill the void on the inside, I began to cave to all the vices being thrown my way.
Between the parties, the men, the alcohol, I was looking for self love, for affirmation from somebody, when in reality, I didn't love who I was, and I couldn't seem to get a handle on regulating my own weight.
I began to face my insecurities head on.
And instead, I was filling my life with temporary fixes.
I, like so many young women, have struggled to love who I am.
And Dove's global report on attitudes towards beauty actually did a survey with thousands of women in ten different countries.
And you know what the most striking result was?
That only 2% of women find themselves beautiful.
2%!
We need to work together to redefine the global vision of beauty.
And it starts with becoming your own role model.
As a curvy woman it was the assumption that I should look up to Marilyn Monroe or Jennifer Lopez mainly because they were two of the most notable curvy women in the public eye that were being praised for their curves.
But these weren't my role models.
In reality, the woman I looked up to the most was my mother.
She told me I was beautiful, and she never devalued herself.
So why would I?
She told me and taught me that true beauty comes from within and that validation and self worth must also come from within.
In my lowest moments of insecurity this is when I realized that I had to reclaim my body and its image as my own.
Plus-size fashion is an 18-billion-dollar industry.
And now IMG, the world's number one modeling agency, has signed me and other models that are not defined by their size.
My body, like my confidence, has been picked apart, manipulated, and controlled by others who didn't necessarily understand it.
I had to learn to reclaim my body as my own.
And in reclaiming my body as my own, I understood as a woman that I had a greater purpose.
I had a greater purpose to redefine beauty.
The feminine beauty.
Curvy models are becoming more and more vocal about the isolating nature of the term plus size.
We are calling ourselves what we want to be called: women with shapes that are our own.
I believe beauty is beyond size.
With so much emphasis on the body and external, it's no wonder that we all suffer so much internally.
But you know, people in the fashion industry actually told me that I would never be in magazines let alone the covers of them.
Well, I guess we've proven them wrong.
Five covers in a little over a year.
And I was one of the very first curvy models to be featured in Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Edition.
(Applause) Thank you.
Never let anybody tell you that you can't.
I have achieved, and I'm still achieving what was seemingly impossible.
My goal is to give a voice to young women.
To give a voice to young women who struggle to find someone they can look up to.
For girls who struggle to look inside the mirror and say, I love you.
For women who feel uncomfortable expressing their confidence they've locked away inside themselves.
For women who have relinquished their rights to someone else.
It is critical that both men and women create a body positive environment.
Uplift the important women in your lives.
Create a safe space for them to express their body and their beauty for who they are not because of who they're not.
Be you.
Be real.
Be authentic.
Be your favorite kind of woman.
Don't let anybody else take that job.
And remember this is the generation of body diversity.
The current is changing.
I now invite all of you to #TEDxBV15 with your own self-affirming words.
There may not be a full-length mirror in front of each of you today, but I want to challenge you to think about what you would want to say to yourself in the mirror with your own self-affirming words.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For the past 15 years I've been trying to change your mind.
In my work I harness pop culture and emerging technology to shift cultural norms.
I've made video games to promote human rights, I've made animations to raise awareness about unfair immigration laws and I've even made location-based augmented reality apps to change perceptions around homelessness well before Pokémon Go.
(Laughter) But then I began to wonder whether a game or an app can really change attitudes and behaviors, and if so, can I measure that change?
What's the science behind that process?
So I shifted my focus from making media and technology to measuring their neurobiological effects.
Here's what I discovered.
The web, mobile devices, virtual and augmented reality were rescripting our nervous systems.
And they were literally changing the structure of our brain.
The very technologies I had been using to positively influence hearts and minds were actually eroding functions in the brain necessary for empathy and decision-making.
In fact, our dependence upon the web and mobile devices might be taking over our cognitive and affective faculties, rendering us socially and emotionally incompetent, and I felt complicit in this dehumanization.
I realized that before I could continue making media about social issues, I needed to reverse engineer the harmful effects of technology.
To tackle this I asked myself, "How can I translate the mechanisms of empathy, the cognitive, affective and motivational aspects, into an engine that simulates the narrative ingredients that move us to act?"
To answer this, I had to build a machine.
(Laughter) I've been developing an open-source biometric lab, an AI system which I call the Limbic Lab.
The lab not only captures the brain and body's unconscious response to media and technology but also uses machine learning to adapt content based on these biological responses.
My goal is to find out what combination of narrative ingredients are the most appealing and galvanizing to specific target audiences to enable social justice, cultural and educational organizations to create more effective media.
The Limbic Lab consists of two components: a narrative engine and a media machine.
While a subject is viewing or interacting with media content, the narrative engine takes in and syncs real-time data from brain waves, biophysical data like heart rate, blood flow, body temperature and muscle contraction, as well as eye-tracking and facial expressions.
Data is captured at key places where critical plot points, character interaction or unusual camera angles occur.
Like the final scene in "Game of Thrones, Red Wedding," when shockingly, everybody dies.
(Laughter) Survey data on that person's political beliefs, along with their psychographic and demographic data, are integrated into the system to gain a deeper understanding of the individual.
Let me give you an example.
Matching people's TV preferences with their views on social justice issues reveals that Americans who rank immigration among their top three concerns are more likely to be fans of "The Walking Dead," and they often watch for the adrenaline boost, which is measurable.
A person's biological signature and their survey response combines into a database to create their unique media imprint.
Then our predictive model finds patterns between media imprints and tells me which narrative ingredients are more likely to lead to engagement in altruistic behavior rather than distress and apathy.
The more imprints added to the database across mediums from episodic television to games, the better the predictive models become.
In short, I am mapping the first media genome.
(Applause and cheers) Whereas the human genome identifies all genes involved in sequencing human DNA, the growing database of media imprints will eventually allow me to determine the media DNA for a specific person.
Already the Limbic Lab's narrative engine helps content creators refine their storytelling, so that it resonates with their target audiences on an individual level.
The Limbic Lab's other component, the media machine, will assess how media elicits an emotional and physiological response, then pulls scenes from a content library targeted to person-specific media DNA.
Applying artificial intelligence to biometric data creates a truly personalized experience.
One that adapts content based on real-time unconscious responses.
Imagine if nonprofits and media makers were able to measure how audiences feel as they experience it and alter content on the fly.
I believe this is the future of media.
To date, most media and social-change strategies have attempted to appeal to mass audiences, but the future is media customized for each person.
As real-time measurement of media consumption and automated media production becomes the norm, we will soon be consuming media tailored directly to our cravings using a blend of psychographics, biometrics and AI.
It's like personalized medicine based on our DNA.
I call it "biomedia."
I am currently testing the Limbic Lab in a pilot study with the Norman Lear Center, which looks at the top 50 episodic television shows.
But I am grappling with an ethical dilemma.
If I design a tool that can be turned into a weapon, should I build it?
By open-sourcing the lab to encourage access and inclusivity, I also run the risk of enabling powerful governments and profit-driven companies to appropriate the platform for fake news, marketing or other forms of mass persuasion.
For me, therefore, it is critical to make my research as transparent to lay audiences as GMO labels.
However, this is not enough.
As creative technologists, we have a responsibility not only to reflect upon how present technology shapes our cultural values and social behavior, but also to actively challenge the trajectory of future technology.
It is my hope that we make an ethical commitment to harvesting the body's intelligence for the creation of authentic and just stories that transform media and technology from harmful weapons into narrative medicine.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
So, I guess it is a result of globalization that you can find Coca-Cola tins on top of Everest and a Buddhist monk in Monterey.
(Laughter) And so I just came, two days ago, from the Himalayas to your kind invitation.
So I would like to invite you, also, for a while, to the Himalayas themselves.
And to show the place where meditators, like me, who began with being a molecular biologist in Pasteur Institute, and found their way to the mountains.
So these are a few images I was lucky to take and be there.
There's Mount Kailash in Eastern Tibet -- wonderful setting.
This is from Marlboro country.
(Laughter) This is a turquoise lake.
A meditator.
This is the hottest day of the year somewhere in Eastern Tibet, on August 1.
And the night before, we camped, and my Tibetan friends said, "We are going to sleep outside."
And I said, "Why?
We have enough space in the tent."
They said, "Yes, but it's summertime."
(Laughter) So now, we are going to speak of happiness.
As a Frenchman, I must say that there are a lot of French intellectuals that think happiness is not at all interesting.
(Laughter) I just wrote an essay on happiness, and there was a controversy.
And someone wrote an article saying, "Don't impose on us the dirty work of happiness."
(Laughter) "We don't care about being happy.
We need to live with passion.
We like the ups and downs of life.
We like our suffering because it's so good when it ceases for a while."
(Laughter) This is what I see from the balcony of my hermitage in the Himalayas.
It's about two meters by three, and you are all welcome any time.
(Laughter) Now, let's come to happiness or well-being.
And first of all, you know, despite what the French intellectuals say, it seems that no one wakes up in the morning thinking, "May I suffer the whole day?"
(Laughter) Which means that somehow, consciously or not, directly or indirectly, in the short or the long term, whatever we do, whatever we hope, whatever we dream -- somehow, is related to a deep, profound desire for well-being or happiness.
As Pascal said, even the one who hangs himself, somehow, is looking for cessation of suffering.
He finds no other way.
But then, if you look in the literature, East and West, you can find incredible diversity of definition of happiness.
Some people say, I only believed in remembering the past, imagining the future, never the present.
Some people say happiness is right now; it's the quality of the freshness of the present moment.
And that led Henri Bergson, the French philosopher, to say, "All the great thinkers of humanity have left happiness in the vague so that each of them could define their own terms."
Well, that would be fine if it was just a secondary preoccupation in life.
But now, if it is something that is going to determine the quality of every instant of our life, then we better know what it is, have some clearer idea.
And probably, the fact that we don't know that is why, so often, although we seek happiness, it seems we turn our back to it.
Although we want to avoid suffering, it seems we are running somewhat towards it.
And that can also come from some kind of confusions.
One of the most common ones is happiness and pleasure.
But if you look at the characteristics of those two, pleasure is contingent upon time, upon its object, upon the place.
It is something that -- changes of nature.
Beautiful chocolate cake: first serving is delicious, second one not so much, then we feel disgust.
(Laughter) That's the nature of things.
We get tired.
I used to be a fan of Bach.
I used to play it on the guitar, you know.
I can hear it two, three, five times.
If I had to hear it 24 hours, non-stop, it might be very tiring.
If you are feeling very cold, you come near a fire, it's so wonderful.
After some moments, you just go a little back, and then it starts burning.
It sort of uses itself as you experience it.
And also, again, it can -- also, it's something that you -- it is not something that is radiating outside.
Like, you can feel intense pleasure and some others around you can be suffering a lot.
Now, what, then, will be happiness?
And happiness, of course, is such a vague word, so let's say well-being.
And so, I think the best definition, according to the Buddhist view, is that well-being is not just a mere pleasurable sensation.
It is a deep sense of serenity and fulfillment.
A state that actually pervades and underlies all emotional states, and all the joys and sorrows that can come one's way.
For you, that might be surprising.
Can we have this kind of well-being while being sad?
In a way, why not?
Because we are speaking of a different level.
Look at the waves coming near the shore.
When you are at the bottom of the wave, you hit the bottom.
You hit the solid rock.
When you are surfing on the top, you are all elated.
So you go from elation to depression -- there's no depth.
Now, if you look at the high sea, there might be beautiful, calm ocean, like a mirror.
There might be storms, but the depth of the ocean is still there, unchanged.
So now, how is that?
It can only be a state of being, not just a fleeting emotion, sensation.
Even joy -- that can be the spring of happiness.
But there's also wicked joy, you can rejoice in someone's suffering.
So how do we proceed in our quest for happiness?
Very often, we look outside.
We think that if we could gather this and that, all the conditions, something that we say, "Everything to be happy -- to have everything to be happy."
That very sentence already reveals the doom, destruction of happiness.
To have everything.
If we miss something, it collapses.
And also, when things go wrong, we try to fix the outside so much, but our control of the outer world is limited, temporary, and often, illusory.
So now, look at inner conditions.
Aren't they stronger?
Isn't it the mind that translates the outer condition into happiness and suffering?
And isn't that stronger?
We know, by experience, that we can be what we call "a little paradise," and yet, be completely unhappy within.
The Dalai Lama was once in Portugal, and there was a lot of construction going on everywhere.
So one evening, he said, "Look, you are doing all these things, but isn't it nice, also, to build something within?"
And he said, " that -- even if you get a high-tech flat on the 100th floor of a super-modern and comfortable building, if you are deeply unhappy within, all you are going to look for is a window from which to jump."
So now, at the opposite, we know a lot of people who, in very difficult circumstances, manage to keep serenity, inner strength, inner freedom, confidence.
So now, if the inner conditions are stronger -- of course, the outer conditions do influence, and it's wonderful to live longer, healthier, to have access to information, education, to be able to travel, to have freedom.
It's highly desirable.
However, this is not enough.
Those are just auxiliary, help conditions.
The experience that translates everything is within the mind.
So then, when we ask oneself how to nurture the condition for happiness, the inner conditions, and which are those which will undermine happiness.
So then, this just needs to have some experience.
We have to know from ourselves, there are certain states of mind that are conducive to this flourishing, to this well-being, what the Greeks called eudaimonia, flourishing.
There are some which are adverse to this well-being.
And so, if we look from our own experience, anger, hatred, jealousy, arrogance, obsessive desire, strong grasping, they don't leave us in such a good state after we have experienced it.
And also, they are detrimental to others' happiness.
So we may consider that the more those are invading our mind, and, like a chain reaction, the more we feel miserable, we feel tormented.
At the opposite, everyone knows deep within that an act of selfless generosity, if from the distance, without anyone knowing anything about it, we could save a child's life, make someone happy.
We don't need the recognition.
We don't need any gratitude.
Just the mere fact of doing that fills such a sense of adequation with our deep nature.
And we would like to be like that all the time.
So is that possible, to change our way of being, to transform one's mind?
Aren't those negative emotions, or destructive emotions, inherent to the nature of mind?
Is change possible in our emotions, in our traits, in our moods?
For that we have to ask, what is the nature of mind?
And if we look from the experiential point of view, there is a primary quality of consciousness that's just the mere fact to be cognitive, to be aware.
Consciousness is like a mirror that allows all images to rise on it.
You can have ugly faces, beautiful faces in the mirror.
The mirror allows that, but the mirror is not tainted, is not modified, is not altered by those images.
Likewise, behind every single thought there is the bare consciousness, pure awareness.
This is the nature.
It cannot be tainted intrinsically with hatred or jealousy because then, if it was always there -- like a dye that would permeate the whole cloth -- then it would be found all the time, somewhere.
We know we're not always angry, always jealous, always generous.

