And I know that I speak for all of us when I tell you that we don't take it for granted.
We know that to be able to come on the bandstand and play music is a blessing.
So how does this all relate to behavioral finance?
Well we're jazz musicians, so stereotypically we don't have a great relationship to finance.
(Laughter) Anyway, I just wanted to sort of point out the way that we handle it.
And the other dynamic of it is that we don't micromanage in jazz.
You have some people who do.
But what that does is it actually limits the artistic possibilities.
If I come up and I dictate to the band that I want to play like this and I want the music to go this way, and I just jump right in ...
ready, just play some time.
One, two, one, two, three, four.
(Music) It's kind of chaotic because I'm bullying my ideas.
I'm telling them, "You come with me over this way."
If I really want the music to go there, the best way for me to do it is to listen.
This is a science of listening.
It has far more to do with what I can perceive than what it is that I can do.
So if I want the music to get to a certain level of intensity, the first step for me is to be patient, to listen to what's going on and pull from something that's going on around me.
When you do that, you engage and inspire the other musicians and they give you more, and gradually it builds.
Watch.
One, two, a one, two, three, four.
(Music) Totally different experience when I'm pulling ideas.
It's much more organic.
It's much more nuanced.
It's not about bullying my vision or anything like that.
It's about being here in the moment, accepting one another and allowing creativity to flow.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was a child, I always wanted to be a superhero.
I wanted to save the world and make everyone happy.
But I knew that I'd need superpowers to make my dreams come true.
So I used to embark on these imaginary journeys to find intergalactic objects from planet Krypton, which was a lot of fun, but didn't yield much result.
When I grew up and realized that science fiction was not a good source for superpowers, I decided instead to embark on a journey of real science, to find a more useful truth.
I started my journey in California, with a UC Berkeley 30-year longitudinal study that examined the photos of students in an old yearbook, and tried to measure their success and well-being throughout their life.
By measuring the students' smiles, researchers were able to predict how fulfilling and long-lasting a subject's marriage would be, (Laughter) how well she would score on standardized tests of well-being, and how inspiring she would be to others.
In another yearbook, I stumbled upon Barry Obama's picture.
When I first saw his picture, I thought that his superpowers came from his super collar.
(Laughter) But now I know it was all in his smile.
Another aha! moment came from a 2010 Wayne State University research project that looked into pre-1950s baseball cards of Major League players.
The researchers found that the span of a player's smile could actually predict the span of his life.
Players who didn't smile in their pictures lived an average of only 72.9 years, where players with beaming smiles lived an average of almost 80 years.
(Laughter) The good news is that we're actually born smiling.
Using 3D ultrasound technology, we can now see that developing babies appear to smile, even in the womb.
When they're born, babies continue to smile -- initially, mostly in their sleep.
And even blind babies smile to the sound of the human voice.
Smiling is one of the most basic, biologically uniform expressions of all humans.
In studies conducted in Papua New Guinea, Paul Ekman, the world's most renowned researcher on facial expressions, found that even members of the Fore tribe, who were completely disconnected from Western culture, and also known for their unusual cannibalism rituals, (Laughter) attributed smiles to descriptions of situations the same way you and I would.
So from Papua New Guinea to Hollywood all the way to modern art in Beijing, we smile often, and use smiles to express joy and satisfaction.
How many people here in this room smile more than 20 times per day?
Raise your hand if you do.
Oh, wow.
Outside of this room, more than a third of us smile more than 20 times per day, whereas less than 14 percent of us smile less than five.
In fact, those with the most amazing superpowers are actually children, who smile as many as 400 times per day.
Have you ever wondered why being around children, who smile so frequently, makes you smile very often?
A recent study at Uppsala University in Sweden found that it's very difficult to frown when looking at someone who smiles.
You ask why?
Because smiling is evolutionarily contagious, and it suppresses the control we usually have on our facial muscles.
Mimicking a smile and experiencing it physically helps us understand whether our smile is fake or real, so we can understand the emotional state of the smiler.
In a recent mimicking study at the University of Clermont-Ferrand in France, subjects were asked to determine whether a smile was real or fake while holding a pencil in their mouth to repress smiling muscles.
Without the pencil, subjects were excellent judges, but with the pencil in their mouth -- when they could not mimic the smile they saw -- their judgment was impaired.
(Laughter) In addition to theorizing on evolution in "The Origin of Species," Charles Darwin also wrote the facial feedback response theory.
His theory states that the act of smiling itself actually makes us feel better, rather than smiling being merely a result of feeling good.
In his study, Darwin actually cited a French neurologist, Guillaume Duchenne, who sent electric jolts to facial muscles to induce and stimulate smiles.
Please, don't try this at home.
(Laughter) In a related German study, researchers used fMRI imaging to measure brain activity before and after injecting Botox to suppress smiling muscles.
The finding supported Darwin's theory, by showing that facial feedback modifies the neural processing of emotional content in the brain, in a way that helps us feel better when we smile.
Smiling stimulates our brain reward mechanism in a way that even chocolate -- a well-regarded pleasure inducer -- cannot match.
British researchers found that one smile can generate the same level of brain stimulation as up to 2,000 bars of chocolate.
(Laughter) Wait -- The same study found that smiling is as stimulating as receiving up to 16,000 pounds sterling in cash.
(Laughter) That's like 25 grand a smile.
It's not bad.
And think about it this way: 25,000 times 400 -- quite a few kids out there feel like Mark Zuckerberg every day.
(Laughter) And unlike lots of chocolate, lots of smiling can actually make you healthier.
Smiling can help reduce the level of stress-enhancing hormones like cortisol, adrenaline and dopamine, increase the level of mood-enhancing hormones like endorphins, and reduce overall blood pressure.
And if that's not enough, smiling can actually make you look good in the eyes of others.
A recent study at Penn State University found that when you smile, you don't only appear to be more likable and courteous, but you actually appear to be more competent.
So whenever you want to look great and competent, reduce your stress or improve your marriage, or feel as if you just had a whole stack of high-quality chocolate without incurring the caloric cost, or as if you found 25 grand in a pocket of an old jacket you hadn't worn for ages, or whenever you want to tap into a superpower that will help you and everyone around you live a longer, healthier, happier life, smile.
(Applause)
We are at a remarkable moment in time.
We face over the next two decades two fundamental transformations that will determine whether the next 100 years is the best of centuries or the worst of centuries.
Let me illustrate with an example.
I first visited Beijing 25 years ago to teach at the People's University of China.
China was getting serious about market economics and about university education, so they decided to call in the foreign experts.
Like most other people, I moved around Beijing by bicycle.
Apart from dodging the occasional vehicle, it was a safe and easy way to get around.
Cycling in Beijing now is a completely different prospect.
The roads are jammed by cars and trucks.
The air is dangerously polluted from the burning of coal and diesel.
When I was there last in the spring, there was an advisory for people of my age — over 65 — to stay indoors and not move much.
How did this come about?
It came from the way in which Beijing has grown as a city.
It's doubled over those 25 years, more than doubled, from 10 million to 20 million.
It's become a sprawling urban area dependent on dirty fuel, dirty energy, particularly coal.
China burns half the world's coal each year, and that's why, it is a key reason why, it is the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases.
At the same time, we have to recognize that in that period China has grown remarkably.
It has become the world's second largest economy.
Hundreds of millions of people have been lifted out of poverty.
That's really important.
But at the same time, the people of China are asking the question: What's the value of this growth if our cities are unlivable?
They've analyzed, diagnosed that this is an unsustainable path of growth and development.
China's planning to scale back coal.
It's looking to build its cities in different ways.
Now, the growth of China is part of a dramatic change, fundamental change, in the structure of the world economy.
Just 25 years ago, the developing countries, the poorer countries of the world, were, notwithstanding being the vast majority of the people, they accounted for only about a third of the world's output.
Now it's more than half; 25 years from now, it will probably be two thirds from the countries that we saw 25 years ago as developing.
That's a remarkable change.
It means that most countries around the world, rich or poor, are going to be facing the two fundamental transformations that I want to talk about and highlight.
Now, the first of these transformations is the basic structural change of the economies and societies that I've already begun to illustrate through the description of Beijing.
Fifty percent now in urban areas.
That's going to go to 70 percent in 2050.
Over the next two decades, we'll see the demand for energy rise by 40 percent, and the growth in the economy and in the population is putting increasing pressure on our land, on our water and on our forests.
This is profound structural change.
If we manage it in a negligent or a shortsighted way, we will create waste, pollution, congestion, destruction of land and forests.
If we think of those three areas that I have illustrated with my numbers — cities, energy, land — if we manage all that badly, then the outlook for the lives and livelihoods of the people around the world would be poor and damaged.
And more than that, the emissions of greenhouse gases would rise, with immense risks to our climate.
Concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are already higher than they've been for millions of years.
If we go on increasing those concentrations, we risk temperatures over the next century or so that we have not seen on this planet for tens of millions of years.
We've been around as Homo sapiens — that's a rather generous definition, sapiens — for perhaps a quarter of a million years, a quarter of a million.
We risk temperatures we haven't seen for tens of millions of years over a century.
That would transform the relationship between human beings and the planet.
It would lead to changing deserts, changing rivers, changing patterns of hurricanes, changing sea levels, hundreds of millions of people, perhaps billions of people who would have to move, and if we've learned anything from history, that means severe and extended conflict.
And we couldn't just turn it off.
You can't make a peace treaty with the planet.
You can't negotiate with the laws of physics.
You're in there.
You're stuck.
Those are the stakes we're playing for, and that's why we have to make this second transformation, the climate transformation, and move to a low-carbon economy.
Now, the first of these transformations is going to happen anyway.
We have to decide whether to do it well or badly, the economic, or structural, transformation.
But the second of the transformations, the climate transformations, we have to decide to do.
Those two transformations face us in the next two decades.
The next two decades are decisive for what we have to do.
Now, the more I've thought about this, the two transformations coming together, the more I've come to realize that this is an enormous opportunity.
It's an opportunity which we can use or it's an opportunity which we can lose.
And let me explain through those three key areas that I've identified: cities, energy and land.
And let me start with cities.
I've already described the problems of Beijing: pollution, congestion, waste and so on.
Surely we recognize that in many of our cities around the world.
Now, with cities, like life but particularly cities, you have to think ahead.
The cities that are going to be built — and there are many, and many big ones — we have to think of how to design them in a compact way so we can save travel time and we can save energy.
The cities that already are there, well established, we have to think about renewal and investment in them so that we can connect ourselves much better within those cities, and make it easier, encourage more people, to live closer to the center.
We've got examples building around the world of the kinds of ways in which we can do that.
The bus rapid transport system in Bogotá in Colombia is a very important case of how to move around safely and quickly in a non-polluting way in a city: very frequent buses, strongly protected routes, the same service, really, as an underground railway system, but much, much cheaper and can be done much more quickly, a brilliant idea in many more cities around the world that's developing.
Now, some things in cities do take time.
Some things in cities can happen much more quickly.
Take my hometown, London.
In 1952, smog in London killed 4,000 people and badly damaged the lives of many, many more.
And it happened all the time.
For those of you live outside London in the U.K.
will remember it used to be called The Smoke.
That's the way London was.
By regulating coal, within a few years the problems of smog were rapidly reduced.
I remember the smogs well.
When the visibility dropped to than a few meters, they stopped the buses and I had to walk.
This was the 1950s.
I had to walk home three miles from school.
Again, breathing was a hazardous activity.
But it was changed.
It was changed by a decision.
Good decisions can bring good results, striking results, quickly.
We've seen more: In London, we've introduced the congestion charge, actually quite quickly and effectively, and we've seen great improvements in the bus system, and cleaned up the bus system.
You can see that the two transformations I've described, the structural and the climate, come very much together.
But we have to invest.
We have to invest in our cities, and we have to invest wisely, and if we do, we'll see cleaner cities, quieter cities, safer cities, more attractive cities, more productive cities, and stronger community in those cities — public transport, recycling, reusing, all sorts of things that bring communities together.
We can do that, but we have to think, we have to invest, we have to plan.
Let me turn to energy.
Now, energy over the last 25 years has increased by about 50 percent.
Eighty percent of that comes from fossil fuels.
Over the next 20 years, perhaps it will increase by another 40 percent or so.
We have to invest strongly in energy, we have to use it much more efficiently, and we have to make it clean.
We can see how to do that.
Take the example of California.
It would be in the top 10 countries in the world if it was independent.
I don't want to start any — (Laughter) California's a big place.
(Laughter) In the next five or six years, they will likely move from around 20 percent in renewables — wind, solar and so on — to over 33 percent, and that would bring California back to greenhouse gas emissions in 2020 to where they were in 1990, a period when the economy in California would more or less have doubled.
That's a striking achievement.
It shows what can be done.
Not just California — the incoming government of India is planning to get solar technology to light up the homes of 400 million people who don't have electricity in India.
They've set themselves a target of five years.
I think they've got a good chance of doing that.
We'll see, but what you're seeing now is people moving much more quickly.
Four hundred million, more than the population of the United States.
Those are the kinds of ambitions now people are setting themselves in terms of rapidity of change.
Again, you can see good decisions can bring quick results, and those two transformations, the economy and the structure and the climate and the low carbon, are intimately intertwined.
Do the first one well, the structural, the second one on the climate becomes much easier.
Look at land, land and particularly forests.
Forests are the hosts to valuable plant and animal species.
They hold water in the soil and they take carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere, fundamental to the tackling of climate change.
But we're losing our forests.
In the last decade, we've lost a forest area the size of Portugal, and much more has been degraded.
But we're already seeing that we can do so much about that.
We can recognize the problem, but we can also understand how to tackle it.
In Brazil, the rate of deforestation has been reduced by 70 percent over the last 10 years.
How?
By involving local communities, investing in their agriculture and their economies, by monitoring more carefully, by enforcing the law more strictly.
And it's not just stopping deforestation.
That's of course of first and fundamental importance, but it's also regrading degraded land, regenerating, rehabilitating degraded land.
I first went to Ethiopia in 1967.
It was desperately poor.
In the following years, it suffered devastating famines and profoundly destructive social conflict.
Over the last few years, actually more than a few, Ethiopia has been growing much more rapidly.
It has ambitions to be a middle-income country 15 years from now and to be carbon neutral.
Again, I think it's a strong ambition but it is a plausible one.
You're seeing that commitment there.
You're seeing what can be done.
Ethiopia is investing in clean energy.
It's working in the rehabilitation of land.
In Humbo, in southwest Ethiopia, a wonderful project to plant trees on degraded land and work with local communities on sustainable forest management has led to big increases in living standards.
So we can see, from Beijing to London, from California to India, from Brazil to Ethiopia, we do understand how to manage those two transformations, the structural and the climate.
We do understand how to manage those well.
And technology is changing very rapidly.
I don't have to list all those things to an audience like this, but you can see the electric cars, you can see the batteries using new materials.
You can see that we can manage remotely now our household appliances on our mobile phones when we're away.
You can see better insulation.
And there's much more coming.
But, and it's a big but, the world as a whole is moving far too slowly.
We're not cutting emissions in the way we should.
We're not managing those structural transformations as we can.
The depth of understanding of the immense risks of climate change are not there yet.
The depth of understanding of the attractiveness of what we can do is not there yet.
We need political pressure to build.

