For two years, I volunteered on an ambulance in Jerusalem.
I helped many people, but whenever someone really needed help, I never got there in time.
We never got there.
The traffic is so bad.
The distance, and everything.
We never got there when somebody really needed us.
One day, we received a call about a seven-year-old child choking from a hot dog.
Traffic was horrific, and we were coming from the other side of town in the north part of Jerusalem.
When we got there, 20 minutes later, we started CPR on the kid.
A doctor comes in from a block away, stop us, checks the kid, and tells us to stop CPR.
That second he declared this child dead.
At that moment, I understood that this child died for nothing.
If this doctor, who lived one block away from there, would have come 20 minutes earlier, not have to wait until that siren he heard before coming from the ambulance, if he would have heard about it way before, he would have saved this child.
He could have run from a block away.
He could have saved this child.
I said to myself, there must be a better way.
Together with 15 of my friends -- we were all EMTs — we decided, let's protect our neighborhood, so when something like that happens again, we will be there running to the scene a lot before the ambulance.
So I went over to the manager of the ambulance company and I told him, "Please, whenever you have a call coming into our neighborhood, we have 15 great guys who are willing to stop everything they're doing and run and save lives.
Just alert us by beeper.
We'll buy these beepers, just tell your dispatch to send us the beeper, and we will run and save lives."
Well, he was laughing.
I was 17 years old.
I was a kid.
And he said to me — I remember this like yesterday — he was a great guy, but he said to me, "Kid, go to school, or go open a falafel stand.
We're not really interested in these kinds of new adventures.
We're not interested in your help."
And he threw me out of the room.
"I don't need your help," he said.
I was a very stubborn kid.
As you see now, I'm walking around like crazy, meshugenah.
(Laughter) (Applause) So I decided to use the Israeli very famous technique you've probably all heard of, chutzpah.
(Laughter) And the next day, I went and I bought two police scanners, and I said, "The hell with you, if you don't want to give me information, I'll get the information myself."
And we did turns, who's going to listen to the radio scanners.
The next day, while I was listening to the scanners, I heard about a call coming in of a 70-year-old man hurt by a car only one block away from me on the main street of my neighborhood.
I ran there by foot.
I had no medical equipment.
When I got there, the 70-year-old man was lying on the floor, blood was gushing out of his neck.
He was on Coumadin.
I knew I had to stop his bleeding or else he would die.
I took off my yarmulke, because I had no medical equipment, and with a lot of pressure, I stopped his bleeding.
He was bleeding from his neck.
When the ambulance arrived 15 minutes later, I gave them over a patient who was alive.
(Applause) When I went to visit him two days later, he gave me a hug and was crying and thanking me for saving his life.
At that moment, when I realized this is the first person I ever saved in my life after two years volunteering in an ambulance, I knew this is my life's mission.
So today, 22 years later, we have United Hatzalah.
(Applause) "Hatzalah" means "rescue," for all of you who don't know Hebrew.
I forgot I'm not in Israel.
So we have thousands of volunteers who are passionate about saving lives, and they're spread all around, so whenever a call comes in, they just stop everything and go and run and save a life.
Our average response time today went down to less than three minutes in Israel.
(Applause) I'm talking about heart attacks, I'm talking about car accidents, God forbid bomb attacks, shootings, whatever it is, even a woman 3 o'clock in the morning falling in her home and needs someone to help her.
Three minutes, we'll have a guy with his pajamas running to her house and helping her get up.
The reasons why we're so successful are because of three things.
Thousands of passionate volunteers who will leave everything they do and run to help people they don't even know.
We're not there to replace ambulances.
We're just there to get the gap between the ambulance call until they arrive.
And we save people that otherwise would not be saved.
The second reason is because of our technology.
You know, Israelis are good in technology.
Every one of us has on his phone, no matter what kind of phone, a GPS technology done by NowForce, and whenever a call comes in, the closest five volunteers get the call, and they actually get there really quick, and navigated by a traffic navigator to get there and not waste time.
And this is a great technology we use all over the country and reduce the response time.
And the third thing are these ambucycles.
These ambucycles are an ambulance on two wheels.
We don't transfer people, but we stabilize them, and we save their lives.
They never get stuck in traffic.
They could even go on a sidewalk.
They never, literally, get stuck in traffic.
That's why we get there so fast.
A few years after I started this organization, in a Jewish community, two Muslims from east Jerusalem called me up.
They ask me to meet.
They wanted to meet with me.
Muhammad Asli and Murad Alyan.
When Muhammad told me his personal story, how his father, 55 years old, collapsed at home, had a cardiac arrest, and it took over an hour for an ambulance arrive, and he saw his father die in front of his eyes, he asked me, "Please start this in east Jerusalem."
I said to myself, I saw so much tragedy, so much hate, and it's not about saving Jews.
It's not about saving Muslims.
It's not about saving Christians.
It's about saving people.
So I went ahead, full force -- (Applause) — and I started United Hatzalah in east Jerusalem, and that's why the names United and Hatzalah match so well.
We started hand in hand saving Jews and Arabs.
Arabs were saving Jews.
Jews were saving Arabs.
Something special happened.
Arabs and Jews, they don't always get along together, but here in this situation, the communities, literally, it's an unbelievable situation that happened, the diversities, all of a sudden they had a common interest: Let's save lives together.
Settlers were saving Arabs and Arabs were saving settlers.
It's an unbelievable concept that could work only when you have such a great cause.
And these are all volunteers.
No one is getting money.
They're all doing it for the purpose of saving lives.
When my own father collapsed a few years ago from a cardiac arrest, one of the first volunteers to arrive to save my father was one of these Muslim volunteers from east Jerusalem who was in the first course to join Hatzalah.
And he saved my father.
Could you imagine how I felt in that moment?
When I started this organization, I was 17 years old.
I never imagined that one day I'd be speaking at TEDMED.
I never even knew what TEDMED was then.
I don't think it existed, but I never imagined, I never imagined that it's going to go all around, it's going to spread around, and this last year we started in Panama and Brazil.
All I need is a partner who is a little meshugenah like me, passionate about saving lives, and willing to do it.
And I'm actually starting it in India very soon with a friend who I met in Harvard just a while back.
Hatzalah actually started in Brooklyn by a Hasidic Jew years before us in Williamsburg, and now it's all over the Jewish community in New York, even Australia and Mexico and many other Jewish communities.
But it could spread everywhere.
It's very easy to adopt.
You even saw these volunteers in New York saving lives in the World Trade Center.
Last year alone, we treated in Israel 207,000 people.
Forty-two thousand of them were life-threatening situations.
And we made a difference.
I guess you could call this a lifesaving flash mob, and it works.
When I look all around here, I see lots of people who would go an extra mile, run an extra mile to save other people, no matter who they are, no matter what religion, no matter who, where they come from.
We all want to be heroes.
We just need a good idea, motivation and lots of chutzpah, and we could save millions of people that otherwise would not be saved.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The first thing I want to do is say thank you to all of you.
The second thing I want to do is introduce my co-author and dear friend and co-teacher.
Ken and I have been working together for almost 40 years.
That's Ken Sharpe over there.
(Applause) So there is among many people -- certainly me and most of the people I talk to -- a kind of collective dissatisfaction with the way things are working, with the way our institutions run.
Our kids' teachers seem to be failing them.
Our doctors don't know who the hell we are, and they don't have enough time for us.
We certainly can't trust the bankers, and we certainly can't trust the brokers.
They almost brought the entire financial system down.
And even as we do our own work, all too often, we find ourselves having to choose between doing what we think is the right thing and doing the expected thing, or the required thing, or the profitable thing.
So everywhere we look, pretty much across the board, we worry that the people we depend on don't really have our interests at heart.
Or if they do have our interests at heart, we worry that they don't know us well enough to figure out what they need to do in order to allow us to secure those interests.
They don't understand us.
They don't have the time to get to know us.
There are two kinds of responses that we make to this sort of general dissatisfaction.
If things aren't going right, the first response is: let's make more rules, let's set up a set of detailed procedures to make sure that people will do the right thing.
Give teachers scripts to follow in the classroom, so even if they don't know what they're doing and don't care about the welfare of our kids, as long as they follow the scripts, our kids will get educated.
Give judges a list of mandatory sentences to impose for crimes, so that you don't need to rely on judges using their judgment.
Instead, all they have to do is look up on the list what kind of sentence goes with what kind of crime.
Impose limits on what credit card companies can charge in interest and on what they can charge in fees.
More and more rules to protect us against an indifferent, uncaring set of institutions we have to deal with.
Or -- or maybe and -- in addition to rules, let's see if we can come up with some really clever incentives so that, even if the people we deal with don't particularly want to serve our interests, it is in their interest to serve our interest -- the magic incentives that will get people to do the right thing even out of pure selfishness.
So we offer teachers bonuses if the kids they teach score passing grades on these big test scores that are used to evaluate the quality of school systems.
Rules and incentives -- "sticks" and "carrots."
We passed a bunch of rules to regulate the financial industry in response to the recent collapse.
There's the Dodd-Frank Act, there's the new Consumer Financial Protection Agency that is temporarily being headed through the backdoor by Elizabeth Warren.
Maybe these rules will actually improve the way these financial services companies behave.
We'll see.
In addition, we are struggling to find some way to create incentives for people in the financial services industry that will have them more interested in serving the long-term interests even of their own companies, rather than securing short-term profits.
So if we find just the right incentives, they'll do the right thing -- as I said -- selfishly, and if we come up with the right rules and regulations, they won't drive us all over a cliff.
And Ken and I certainly know that you need to reign in the bankers.
If there is a lesson to be learned from the financial collapse it is that.
But what we believe, and what we argue in the book, is that there is no set of rules, no matter how detailed, no matter how specific, no matter how carefully monitored and enforced, there is no set of rules that will get us what we need.
Why?
Because bankers are smart people.
And, like water, they will find cracks in any set of rules.
You design a set of rules that will make sure that the particular reason why the financial system "almost-collapse" can't happen again.
It is naive beyond description to think that having blocked this source of financial collapse, you have blocked all possible sources of financial collapse.
So it's just a question of waiting for the next one and then marveling at how we could have been so stupid as not to protect ourselves against that.
What we desperately need, beyond, or along with, better rules and reasonably smart incentives, is we need virtue.
We need character.
We need people who want to do the right thing.
And in particular, the virtue that we need most of all is the virtue that Aristotle called "practical wisdom."
Practical wisdom is the moral will to do the right thing and the moral skill to figure out what the right thing is.
So Aristotle was very interested in watching how the craftsmen around him worked.
And he was impressed at how they would improvise novel solutions to novel problems -- problems that they hadn't anticipated.
So one example is he sees these stonemasons working on the Isle of Lesbos, and they need to measure out round columns.
Well if you think about it, it's really hard to measure out round columns using a ruler.
So what do they do?
They fashion a novel solution to the problem.
They created a ruler that bends, what we would call these days a tape measure -- a flexible rule, a rule that bends.
And Aristotle said, "Hah, they appreciated that sometimes to design rounded columns, you need to bend the rule."
And Aristotle said often in dealing with other people, we need to bend the rules.
Dealing with other people demands a kind of flexibility that no set of rules can encompass.
Wise people know when and how to bend the rules.
Wise people know how to improvise.
The way my co-author , Ken, and I talk about it, they are kind of like jazz musicians.
The rules are like the notes on the page, and that gets you started, but then you dance around the notes on the page, coming up with just the right combination for this particular moment with this particular set of fellow players.
So for Aristotle, the kind of rule-bending, rule exception-finding and improvisation that you see in skilled craftsmen is exactly what you need to be a skilled moral craftsman.
And in interactions with people, almost all the time, it is this kind of flexibility that is required.
A wise person knows when to bend the rules.
A wise person knows when to improvise.
And most important, a wise person does this improvising and rule-bending in the service of the right aims.
If you are a rule-bender and an improviser mostly to serve yourself, what you get is ruthless manipulation of other people.
So it matters that you do this wise practice in the service of others and not in the service of yourself.
And so the will to do the right thing is just as important as the moral skill of improvisation and exception-finding.
Together they comprise practical wisdom, which Aristotle thought was the master virtue.
So I'll give you an example of wise practice in action.
It's the case of Michael.
Michael's a young guy.
He had a pretty low-wage job.
He was supporting his wife and a child, and the child was going to parochial school.
Then he lost his job.
He panicked about being able to support his family.
One night, he drank a little too much, and he robbed a cab driver -- stole 50 dollars.
He robbed him at gunpoint.
It was a toy gun.
He got caught.
He got tried.
He got convicted.
The Pennsylvania sentencing guidelines required a minimum sentence for a crime like this of two years, 24 months.
The judge on the case, Judge Lois Forer thought that this made no sense.
He had never committed a crime before.
He was a responsible husband and father.
He had been faced with desperate circumstances.
All this would do is wreck a family.
And so she improvised a sentence -- 11 months, and not only that, but release every day to go to work.
Spend your night in jail, spend your day holding down a job.
He did.
He served out his sentence.
He made restitution and found himself a new job.
And the family was united.
And it seemed on the road to some sort of a decent life -- a happy ending to a story involving wise improvisation from a wise judge.
But it turned out the prosecutor was not happy that Judge Forer ignored the sentencing guidelines and sort of invented her own, and so he appealed.
And he asked for the mandatory minimum sentence for armed robbery.
He did after all have a toy gun.
The mandatory minimum sentence for armed robbery is five years.
He won the appeal.
Michael was sentenced to five years in prison.
Judge Forer had to follow the law.
And by the way, this appeal went through after he had finished serving his sentence, so he was out and working at a job and taking care of his family and he had to go back into jail.
Judge Forer did what she was required to do, and then she quit the bench.
And Michael disappeared.
So that is an example, both of wisdom in practice and the subversion of wisdom by rules that are meant, of course, to make things better.
Now consider Ms. Dewey.
Ms. Dewey's a teacher in a Texas elementary school.
She found herself listening to a consultant one day who was trying to help teachers boost the test scores of the kids, so that the school would reach the elite category in percentage of kids passing big tests.
All these schools in Texas compete with one another to achieve these milestones, and there are bonuses and various other treats that come if you beat the other schools.
So here was the consultant's advice: first, don't waste your time on kids who are going to pass the test no matter what you do.
Second, don't waste your time on kids who can't pass the test no matter what you do.
Third, don't waste your time on kids who moved into the district too late for their scores to be counted.
Focus all of your time and attention on the kids who are on the bubble, the so-called "bubble kids" -- kids where your intervention can get them just maybe over the line from failing to passing.
So Ms. Dewey heard this, and she shook her head in despair while fellow teachers were sort of cheering each other on and nodding approvingly.
It's like they were about to go play a football game.
For Ms. Dewey, this isn't why she became a teacher.
Now Ken and I are not naive, and we understand that you need to have rules.
You need to have incentives.
People have to make a living.
But the problem with relying on rules and incentives is that they demoralize professional activity, and they demoralize professional activity in two senses.

