There's a little club of countries in the world that offer no national paid leave to new mothers.
Care to guess who they are?
The first eight make up eight million in total population.
They are Papua New Guinea, Suriname and the tiny island nations of Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau and Tonga.
Number nine is the United States of America, with 320 million people.
Oh, that's it.
That's the end of the list.
Every other economy on the planet has found a way to make some level of national paid leave work for the people doing the work of the future of those countries, but we say, "We couldn't possibly do that."
We say that the market will solve this problem, and then we cheer when corporations offer even more paid leave to the women who are already the highest-educated and highest-paid among us.
Remember that 88 percent?
Those middle- and low-income women are not going to participate in that.
We know that there are staggering economic, financial, physical and emotional costs to this approach.
We have decided -- decided, not an accident, to pass these costs directly on to working mothers and their babies.
We know the price tag is higher for low-income women, therefore disproportionately for women of color.
We pass them on anyway.
All of this is to America's shame.
But it's also to America's risk.
Because what would happen if all of these individual so-called choices to have babies started to turn into individual choices not to have babies.
One woman told me, "New motherhood is hard.
It shouldn't be traumatic.
When we talk about expanding our family now, we focus on how much time I would have to care for myself and a new baby.
If we were to have to do it again the same way as with our first, we might stick with one kid."
The birthrate needed in America to keep the population stable is 2.1 live births per woman.
In America today, we are at 1.86.
We need women to have babies, and we are actively disincentivizing working women from doing that.
What would happen to work force, to innovation, to GDP, if one by one, the working mothers of this country were to decide that they can't bear to do this thing more than once?
I'm here today with only one idea worth spreading, and you've guessed what it is.
It is long since time for the most powerful country on Earth to offer national paid leave to the people doing the work of the future of this country and to the babies who represent that future.
Childbirth is a public good.
This leave should be state-subsidized.
It should have no exceptions for small businesses, length of employment or entrepreneurs.
It should be able to be shared between partners.
I've talked today a lot about mothers, but co-parents matter on so many levels.
Not one more woman should have to go back to work while she is hobbling and bleeding.
Not one more family should have to drain their savings account to buy a few days of rest and recovery and bonding.
Not one more fragile infant should have to go directly from the incubator to day care because his parents have used up all of their meager time sitting in the NICU.
Not one more working family should be told that the collision of their work, their needed work and their needed parenthood, is their problem alone.
The catch is that when this is happening to a new family, it is consuming, and a family with a new baby is more financially vulnerable than they've ever been before, so that new mother cannot afford to speak up on her own behalf.
But all of us have voices.
I am done, done having babies, and you might be pre-baby, you might be post-baby, you might be no baby.
It should not matter.
We have to stop framing this as a mother's issue, or even a women's issue.
This is an American issue.
We need to stop buying the lie that these images tell us.
We need to stop being comforted by them.
We need to question why we're told that this can't work when we see it work everywhere all over the world.
We need to recognize that this American reality is to our dishonor and to our peril.
Because this is not, this is not, and this is not what a working mother looks like.
(Applause)
If you were to take any everyday object, say a coffee cup, and break it in half, then in half again, and keep carrying on, where would you end up?
Could you keep on going forever?
Or would you find a set of indivisible building blocks out of which everything is made?
Physicists have found the latter- that matter is made of fundamental particles, the smallest things in the universe.
Particles interact with each other according to a theory called the “Standard Model”.
The Standard Model is a remarkably elegant encapsulation of the strange quantum world of indivisible, infinitely small particles.
It also covers the forces that govern how particles move, interact, and bind together to give shape to the world around us.
So how does it work?
Zooming in on the fragments of the cup, we see molecules, made of atoms bound up together.
A molecule is the smallest unit of any chemical compound.
An atom is the smallest unit of any element in the periodic table.
But the atom is not the smallest unit of matter.
Experiments found that each atom has a tiny, dense nucleus, surrounded by a cloud of even tinier electrons.
The electron is, as far as we know, one of the fundamental, indivisible building blocks of the universe.
It was the first Standard Model particle ever discovered.
Electrons are bound to an atom’s nucleus by electromagnetism.
They attract each other by exchanging particles called photons, which are quanta of light that carry the electromagnetic force, one of the fundamental forces of the Standard Model.
The nucleus has more secrets to reveal, as it contains protons and neutrons.
Though once thought to be fundamental particles on their own, in 1968 physicists found that protons and neutrons are actually made of quarks, which are indivisible.
A proton contains two “up” quarks and one “down” quark.
A neutron contains two down quarks and one up.
The nucleus is held together by the strong force, another fundamental force of the Standard Model.
Just as photons carry the electromagnetic force, particles called gluons carry the strong force.
Electrons, together with up and down quarks, seem to be all we need to build atoms and therefore describe normal matter.
However, high energy experiments reveal that there are actually six quarks– down &amp; up, strange &amp; charm, and bottom &amp; top - and they come in a wide range of masses.
The same was found for electrons, which have heavier siblings called the muon and the tau.
Why are there three (and only three) different versions of each of these particles?
This remains a mystery.
These heavy particles are only produced, for very brief moments, in high energy collisions, and are not seen in everyday life.
This is because they decay very quickly into the lighter particles.
Such decays involve the exchange of force-carrying particles, called the W and Z, which – unlike the photon – have mass.
They carry the weak force, the final force of the Standard Model.
This same force allows protons and neutrons to transform into each other, a vital part of the fusion interactions that drive the Sun.
To observe the W and Z directly, we needed the high energy collisions provided by particle accelerators.
There’s another kind of Standard Model particle, called neutrinos.
These only interact with other particles through the weak force.
Trillions of neutrinos, many generated by the sun, fly through us every second.
Measurements of weak interactions found that there are different kinds of neutrinos associated with the electron, muon, and tau.
All these particles also have antimatter versions, which have the opposite charge but are otherwise identical.
Matter and antimatter particles are produced in pairs in high-energy collisions, and they annihilate each other when they meet.
The final particle of the Standard Model is the Higgs boson – a quantum ripple in the background energy field of the universe.
Interacting with this field is how all the fundamental matter particles acquire mass, according to the Standard Model.
The ATLAS Experiment on the Large Hadron Collider is studying the Standard Model in-depth.
By taking precise measurements of the particles and forces that make up the universe, ATLAS physicists can look for answers to mysteries not explained by the Standard Model.
For example, how does gravity fit in?
What is the real relationship between force carriers and matter particles?
How can we describe “Dark Matter”, which makes up most of the mass in the universe but remains unaccounted for?
While the Standard Model provides a beautiful explanation for the world around us, there is still a universe’s worth of mysteries left to explore.
Welcome to Africa!
Or rather, I should say, welcome home.
Because this is where it all really began, isn't it?
Looking at fossils dating back several millions of years -- it all points to evidence that life for the human species as we know it began right here.
We are on an amazing journey the next four days.
You're going to hear stories of "Africa: The Next Chapter."
Fantastic tales, anecdotes from speakers.
But I want to turn that upside down for a moment, and get something out on the table and clear the air so to say.
What's the worst thing you've ever heard about Africa?
And this is not a rhetorical question.
I actually want answers from you.
Go for it!
The worst.
Famine.
Corruption.
More.
Genocide.
AIDS.
Slavery.
That's enough.
We've all heard these things.
But this is about Africa, the story we have not heard.
The stories that we want to know, and the stories that do exist about positive tales.
A part of my talk is going to be about investment opportunities that exist on this continent, to separate the rhetoric from the reality, the fact from the fiction.
To go to the actual data and statistics that exist about the actual things that are happening on the ground that make Africa a realistic investment opportunity and option for you.
So let's get going because Africa, to some degree, is on a turnaround.
A turnaround in terms of how it manages its image, and how it takes control of its own destiny.
And turnarounds are part and parcel of what I have focused on for most of my professional career.
And it all started almost a decade ago, as a young consultant at McKinsey &amp; Company at their first African office in Johannesburg.
And there we worked with leading CEOs on African issues, and African companies on turnarounds, making the companies not just the best in Africa but the best globally.
But I really formalized this focus on turnarounds when I was completing my MBA in the United States.
It all began with a fantastic phone call.
It was from Rosabeth Moss Kanter, Harvard Business School guru and a professor of mine.
And she said, "I want to write a case, Euvin -- a case on a public-sector leader that has lessons for the corporate world."
And the leader that came to mind was Nelson Mandela.
Because Nelson Mandela, as he took over power as the first democratically-elected president of South Africa, faced a situation of a country that could have slid into the abyss of chaos.
But he started the country on a path of a positive cycle.
Now the case, "Nelson Mandela: Change Leader," became part of the research base for a chapter in Rosabeth's new book called "Confidence."
And "Confidence" became a New York Times bestseller and topped Business Week's hardcover bestseller list.
And why I tell you this story is because later, when I was interviewed on SABC Africa, on a pan-African broadcast, they asked, "What is your key lesson, or the key thing you enjoy the most?" -- because it was a huge privilege to be part of such a project.
The lesson from that was that it was Africa -- an African story -- that was used to share news with the rest of the world of what the benchmark can be for corporate turnarounds.
Africa was being used as a success story!
So I want to share with you a personal story about a turnaround or a transformation.
And that has to do with me because in 1994, I packed a few things into a backpack and headed off for a year of travel in the middle of my university career.
You should have seen my parents' reaction!
(Laughter) But very soon, I found myself from the southern part of Africa, in South Africa -- at the very north, in Egypt.
And I sought out the most remote places.
I went to the Siwa Oasis.
That was one of my stops.
And the Siwa Oasis is famous for several things, but the key thing is that it was the place that Alexander the Great went to when he wanted to find out what his destiny had in store for him.
And legend has it that Alexander trekked through this desert.
Half his battalion was wiped out in the sandstorm.
And myth says that he had an audience with the oracle, and it foretold his destiny of greatness.
This was 300 BC.
So Africa had long been seen as a place to go to for answers.
Now, the thing I remember about Siwa was the magical view of the sky at night.
With no natural light source, Siva is one of these amazing places that when you look up you see a perfect tapestry.
Fast forward to 2002.
I'm sitting in Cambridge, Massachusetts at the Healthcare Development Conference.
And I see the same picture, but from the opposite side.
A satellite picture looking down at the earth.
And it was that picture that made such a profound impact on me because I'll never forget it.
I remember the very moment.
And I wanted to share that image with you of what I saw at that point.
The first thing that I saw was North America at night -- glowing, in all its glory.
A warm feeling.
Light.
And then I saw it -- Africa.
Quite literally the "Dark Continent."
And while Africa may be dark, the thing that brought the message home to me was that this is the challenge we are facing, but it's also the opportunity.
Because whilst Africa may be dark -- other than the few specks that exist north and in the south and other areas -- it's aglow with the light in the hearts of the millions of people that are there.
Entrepreneurs, dynamic people, people with hope.
It was George Kimble, the geographer, who said that, "The only thing dark about Africa is our ignorance of it."
So let's start shedding light on this amazing eclectic continent that has so much to offer.
Let's start unpacking it.
Africa is the second-largest continent, a landmass second from Asia.
It also is the second most populated continent, with 900 million people.
In fact -- coming back to the land mass -- Africa is so big that you could fit in the continental United States, China, and the entire Europe into Africa, and still have space.
Africa is home to over 1,000 languages -- 2,000 is another estimate that's out there -- with over 2,000 languages and dialects.
But you could say, "Invest in Africa in over 1,000 languages, and it wouldn't make a difference."
What does the data say?
As an investment banker, I'm in the cross-flow of information and the changes that are taking place in capital markets.
So I want to share with you some of these bellwether signals, or signs, and winds of change that are sweeping this continent.
So let's start on that.
And let's start at the high level, on the macro-factors.
Inflation, in general, is coming down across Africa -- that's the first sign -- in many countries reaching double-digit figures.
So let's start looking at some of those.
I call it my Z.E.N. cluster.
Zambia: from 2004 to 2006, moves from the 18 percent in inflation to the nine percent.
Egypt: from the 16 percent to about 8.4 percent.
Nigeria: a similar situation, from the 16 percent to the eight percent.
Single digits.
More fascinating, you have other countries -- South Africa, Mauritius, Namibia -- all in single digits.
But that's just part of the story.
You have a similar trend with currencies -- currencies going through an extreme time of stability.
But that's looking at the big picture.
And the first myth to dispel is that Africa is not a country.
It's made up -- (Applause) It's made up of 53 different countries.
So the very definition -- to say "invest in Africa" is a no-go.
It's meaningless.
Each country has a unique value proposition.
You can make money, you can lose money in Africa.
But opportunities, boy oh boy, they exist.
And this is what today is about -- it's about discussing those very opportunities.
So let's start getting into the countries and into the specific material and data.
I was recently elected, as Emeka mentioned, as the President of the South African Chamber of Commerce in America.
And I'm very proud and happy to be in that role because it is a fascinating position to be in.
To hear this dialogue that's just increasing in tenor and velocity, of decisions about trade and companies wanting to come.
So the first port of call: let's talk a little bit about South Africa.
But not the South Africa we always talk about -- the gold, the minerals, the First World infrastructure -- a bit about the other side of it.
For example, South Africa was recently voted as the top destination for the top 1,000 UK companies for offshore call-centers.
Same language, timeline, et cetera.
Makes sense.
Other headlines that have recently reached South Africa were Bain Capital and KKR, the big boys of private equity.
Headline in South Africa: "They have landed."
Quite ominous.
But what were they there for?
To acquire assets.
Bing Capital's acquisition of Edcon, a large retailer, is testimony to the confidence they are starting to place in the economy.
Because it is actually a long-term play.
Being a retailer, it is a play on the belief that this middle-class that's growing will continue to grow, that the boom and the confidence in consumer spending will continue.
But the story of Africa, and my focus, is beyond South Africa because there's so much happening.
Undoubtedly, Nigeria is clearly a hot spot.
Challenges -- and we will hear a lot about Nigeria in these four days.
But looking at Goldman Sachs' work -- we had the famous BRIC Report.
The new report, "The Next Eleven," highlights that by 2020 Nigeria is going to be amongst the top 10 economies in the world.
It's an investment opportunity.
Think about that.
Is anyone -- our banks, our investors -- seriously thinking about going to Nigeria?
If you haven't, why not?
What's going on in Nigeria?
A couple of things.
I want to talk about it from the perspective of capital markets.
Bellwether signs again.
Guarantee Trust Bank recently issued the first Euro Bond out of Africa, and this excludes South Africa.
But the first Eurobond, the raising of international capital offshore, off its own balance sheet, without any sovereign backing -- that is an indication of the confidence that is taking place in that economy.
Without any sovereign backing, a Nigerian company raising capital offshore.
It's just a sign of things to come.
Looking at the oil industry, Africa provides 18 percent of the U.S.'s oil supply, with the Middle East just 16 percent.
It's an important strategic partner.
Let's put Nigeria in perspective.
2.2 to 2.4 million barrels of oil a day -- the same league as Kuwait, the same league as Venezuela.
But with Africa, let's start being careful about this.
And Emeka and I have had these discussions.
We have to move away from what's called "the curse of the commodities."
Because it's not about oil, it's not about commodities.
For Africa to truly be sustainable, we have to move beyond to other industries.
So let's unpack those very quickly, and I'm going to move through these very, very, very fast because I can see that clock counting down.
What else is going on there?
Egypt.
Egypt is launching a first large industrial zone -- 2.8 billion investment.
The announcement just came out the last few weeks.
Close to the Mediterranean, near Alexandria -- textiles, petrochemicals.

