It's more or less like we are forest heroes, but still deforestation champions.
So we can't be satisfied, not even close to satisfied.
So the next step, I think, is to fight to have zero loss of forest cover in Brazil and to have that as a goal for 2020.
That's our next step.
Now I've always been interested in the relationship between climate change and forests.
First, because 15 percent of greenhouse gas emissions come from deforestation, so it's a big part of the problem.
But also, forests can be a big part of the solution since that's the best way we know to sink, capture and store carbon.
Now, there is another relationship of climate and forests that really stuck me in 2008 and made me change my career from forests to working with climate change.
I went to visit Canada, in British Columbia, together with the chiefs of the forest services of other countries that we have a kind of alliance of them, like Canada, Russia, India, China, U.S.
And when we were there we learned about this pine beetle that is literally eating the forests in Canada.
What we see here, those brown trees, these are really dead trees.
They are standing dead trees because of the larvae of the beetle.
What happens is that this beetle is controlled by the cold weather in the winter.
For many years now, they don't have the sufficient cold weather to actually control the population of this beetle.
And it became a disease that is really killing billions of trees.
So I came back with this notion that the forest is actually one of the earliest and most affected victims of climate change.
So I was thinking, if I succeed in working with all my colleagues to actually help to stop deforestation, maybe we will lose the battle later on for climate change by floods, heat, fires and so on.
So I decided to leave the forest service and start to work directly on climate change, find a way to think and understand the challenge, and go from there.
Now, the challenge of climate change is pretty straightforward.
The goal is very clear.
We want to limit the increase of the average temperature of the planet to two degrees.
There are several reasons for that.
I will not get into that now.
But in order to get to this limit of two degrees, which is possible for us to survive, the IPCC, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, defines that we have a budget of emissions of 1,000 billion tons of CO2 from now until the end of the century.
So if we divide this by the number of years, what we have is an average budget of 11 billion tons of CO2 per year.
Now what is one ton of CO2?
It's more or less what one small car, running 20 kilometers a day, will emit in one year.
Or it's one flight, one way, from São Paulo to Johannesburg or to London, one way.
Two ways, two tons.
So 11 billion tons is twice that.
Now the emissions today are 50 billion tons, and it's growing.
It's growing and maybe it will be 61 by 2020.
Now we need to go down to 10 by 2050.
And while this happens, the population will grow from seven to nine billion people, the economy will grow from 60 trillion dollars in 2010 to 200 trillion dollars.
And so what we need to do is to be much more efficient in a way that we can go from seven tons of carbon per capita per person, per year, into something like one.
You have to choose.
You take the airplane or you have a car.
So the question is, can we make it?
And that's the exactly the same question I got when I was developing a plan to combat deforestation.
It's such a big problem, so complex.
Can we really do it?
I think so.
Think of this: Deforestation means 60 percent of the greenhouse gas emissions in Brazil in the last decade.
Now it's a little bit less than 30 percent.
In the world, 60 percent is energy.
So if we can tackle directly the energy, the same way we could tackle deforestation, maybe we can have a chance.
So there are five things that I think we should do.
First, we need to disconnect development from carbon emissions.
We don't need to clear-cut all the forests to actually get more jobs and agriculture and have more economy.
That's what we proved when we decreased deforestation and the economy continued to grow.
Same thing could happen in the energy sector.
Second, we have to move the incentives to the right place.
Today, 500 billion dollars a year goes into subsidies for fossil fuels.
Why don't we put a price on carbon and transfer this to the renewable energy?
Third, we need to measure and make it transparent where, when and who is emitting greenhouse gases so we can have actions specifically for each one of those opportunities.
Fourth, we need to leapfrog the routes of development, which means, you don't need to go to the landline telephone before you get to the mobile phones.
Same way we don't need to go to fossil fuels to the one billion people who don't have access to energy before we get to the clean energy.
And fifth and last, we need to share responsibility between governments, business and civil society.
There is work to do for everybody, and we need to have everybody on board.
So to finalize, I think the future is not like a fate that you have to just go as business as usual goes.
We need to have the courage to actually change the route, invest in something new, think that we can actually change the route.
I think we are doing this with deforestation in Brazil, and I hope we can do it also with climate change in the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I study how the brain processes information.
That is, how it takes information in from the outside world, and converts it into patterns of electrical activity, and then how it uses those patterns to allow you to do things -- to see, hear, to reach for an object.
So I'm really a basic scientist, not a clinician, but in the last year and a half I've started to switch over, to use what we've been learning about these patterns of activity to develop prosthetic devices, and what I wanted to do today is show you an example of this.
It's really our first foray into this.
It's the development of a prosthetic device for treating blindness.
So let me start in on that problem.
There are 10 million people in the U.S.
and many more worldwide who are blind or are facing blindness due to diseases of the retina, diseases like macular degeneration, and there's little that can be done for them.
There are some drug treatments, but they're only effective on a small fraction of the population.
And so, for the vast majority of patients, their best hope for regaining sight is through prosthetic devices.
The problem is that current prosthetics don't work very well.
They're still very limited in the vision that they can provide.
And so, you know, for example, with these devices, patients can see simple things like bright lights and high contrast edges, not very much more, so nothing close to normal vision has been possible.
So what I'm going to tell you about today is a device that we've been working on that I think has the potential to make a difference, to be much more effective, and what I wanted to do is show you how it works.
Okay, so let me back up a little bit and show you how a normal retina works first so you can see the problem that we were trying to solve.
Here you have a retina.
So you have an image, a retina, and a brain.
So when you look at something, like this image of this baby's face, it goes into your eye and it lands on your retina, on the front-end cells here, the photoreceptors.
Then what happens is the retinal circuitry, the middle part, goes to work on it, and what it does is it performs operations on it, it extracts information from it, and it converts that information into a code.
And the code is in the form of these patterns of electrical pulses that get sent up to the brain, and so the key thing is that the image ultimately gets converted into a code.
And when I say code, I do literally mean code.
Like this pattern of pulses here actually means "baby's face," and so when the brain gets this pattern of pulses, it knows that what was out there was a baby's face, and if it got a different pattern it would know that what was out there was, say, a dog, or another pattern would be a house.
Anyway, you get the idea.
And, of course, in real life, it's all dynamic, meaning that it's changing all the time, so the patterns of pulses are changing all the time because the world you're looking at is changing all the time too.
So, you know, it's sort of a complicated thing.
You have these patterns of pulses coming out of your eye every millisecond telling your brain what it is that you're seeing.
So what happens when a person gets a retinal degenerative disease like macular degeneration?
What happens is is that, the front-end cells die, the photoreceptors die, and over time, all the cells and the circuits that are connected to them, they die too.
Until the only things that you have left are these cells here, the output cells, the ones that send the signals to the brain, but because of all that degeneration they aren't sending any signals anymore.
They aren't getting any input, so the person's brain no longer gets any visual information -- that is, he or she is blind.
So, a solution to the problem, then, would be to build a device that could mimic the actions of that front-end circuitry and send signals to the retina's output cells, and they can go back to doing their normal job of sending signals to the brain.
So this is what we've been working on, and this is what our prosthetic does.
So it consists of two parts, what we call an encoder and a transducer.
And so the encoder does just what I was saying: it mimics the actions of the front-end circuitry -- so it takes images in and converts them into the retina's code.
And then the transducer then makes the output cells send the code on up to the brain, and the result is a retinal prosthetic that can produce normal retinal output.
So a completely blind retina, even one with no front-end circuitry at all, no photoreceptors, can now send out normal signals, signals that the brain can understand.
So no other device has been able to do this.
Okay, so I just want to take a sentence or two to say something about the encoder and what it's doing, because it's really the key part and it's sort of interesting and kind of cool.
I'm not sure "cool" is really the right word, but you know what I mean.
So what it's doing is, it's replacing the retinal circuitry, really the guts of the retinal circuitry, with a set of equations, a set of equations that we can implement on a chip.
So it's just math.
In other words, we're not literally replacing the components of the retina.
It's not like we're making a little mini-device for each of the different cell types.
We've just abstracted what the retina's doing with a set of equations.
And so, in a way, the equations are serving as sort of a codebook.
An image comes in, goes through the set of equations, and out comes streams of electrical pulses, just like a normal retina would produce.
Now let me put my money where my mouth is and show you that we can actually produce normal output, and what the implications of this are.
Here are three sets of firing patterns.
The top one is from a normal animal, the middle one is from a blind animal that's been treated with this encoder-transducer device, and the bottom one is from a blind animal treated with a standard prosthetic.
So the bottom one is the state-of-the-art device that's out there right now, which is basically made up of light detectors, but no encoder.
So what we did was we presented movies of everyday things -- people, babies, park benches, you know, regular things happening -- and we recorded the responses from the retinas of these three groups of animals.
Now just to orient you, each box is showing the firing patterns of several cells, and just as in the previous slides, each row is a different cell, and I just made the pulses a little bit smaller and thinner so I could show you a long stretch of data.
So as you can see, the firing patterns from the blind animal treated with the encoder-transducer really do very closely match the normal firing patterns -- and it's not perfect, but it's pretty good -- and the blind animal treated with the standard prosthetic, the responses really don't.
And so with the standard method, the cells do fire, they just don't fire in the normal firing patterns because they don't have the right code.
How important is this?
What's the potential impact on a patient's ability to see?
So I'm just going to show you one bottom-line experiment that answers this, and of course I've got a lot of other data, so if you're interested I'm happy to show more.
So the experiment is called a reconstruction experiment.
So what we did is we took a moment in time from these recordings and asked, what was the retina seeing at that moment?
Can we reconstruct what the retina was seeing from the responses from the firing patterns?
So, when we did this for responses from the standard method and from our encoder and transducer.
So let me show you, and I'm going to start with the standard method first.
So you can see that it's pretty limited, and because the firing patterns aren't in the right code, they're very limited in what they can tell you about what's out there.
So you can see that there's something there, but it's not so clear what that something is, and this just sort of circles back to what I was saying in the beginning, that with the standard method, patients can see high-contrast edges, they can see light, but it doesn't easily go further than that.
So what was the image?
It was a baby's face.
So what about with our approach, adding the code?
And you can see that it's much better.
Not only can you tell that it's a baby's face, but you can tell that it's this baby's face, which is a really challenging task.
So on the left is the encoder alone, and on the right is from an actual blind retina, so the encoder and the transducer.
But the key one really is the encoder alone, because we can team up the encoder with the different transducer.
This is just actually the first one that we tried.
I just wanted to say something about the standard method.
When this first came out, it was just a really exciting thing, the idea that you even make a blind retina respond at all.
But there was this limiting factor, the issue of the code, and how to make the cells respond better, produce normal responses, and so this was our contribution.
Now I just want to wrap up, and as I was mentioning earlier of course I have a lot of other data if you're interested, but I just wanted to give this sort of basic idea of being able to communicate with the brain in its language, and the potential power of being able to do that.
So it's different from the motor prosthetics where you're communicating from the brain to a device.
Here we have to communicate from the outside world into the brain and be understood, and be understood by the brain.
And then the last thing I wanted to say, really, is to emphasize that the idea generalizes.
So the same strategy that we used to find the code for the retina we can also use to find the code for other areas, for example, the auditory system and the motor system, so for treating deafness and for motor disorders.
So just the same way that we were able to jump over the damaged circuitry in the retina to get to the retina's output cells, we can jump over the damaged circuitry in the cochlea to get the auditory nerve, or jump over damaged areas in the cortex, in the motor cortex, to bridge the gap produced by a stroke.
I just want to end with a simple message that understanding the code is really, really important, and if we can understand the code, the language of the brain, things become possible that didn't seem obviously possible before.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Okay, I have no idea what we're going to play.
I won't be able to tell you what it is until it happens.
I didn't realize there was going to be a little music before.
So I think I'm going to start with what I just heard.
(Music) (Applause) Okay, so first of all, let's welcome Mr. Jamire Williams on the drums, (Applause) Burniss Travis on the bass, (Applause) and Mr. Christian Sands on the piano.
(Applause) So the bandstand, as we call it, this is an incredible space.
It is really a sacred space.
And one of the things that is really sacred about it is that you have no opportunity to think about the future, or the past.
You really are alive right here in this moment.
There are so many decisions being made when you walk on the bandstand.
We had no idea what key we were going to play in.
In the middle, we sort of made our way into a song called "Titi Boom."
But that could have happened -- maybe, maybe not.
Everyone's listening.
We're responding.
You have no time for projected ideas.
So the idea of a mistake: From the perspective of a jazz musician, it's easier to talk about someone else's mistake.
So the way I perceive a mistake when I'm on the bandstand -- first of all, we don't really see it as a mistake.
The only mistake lies in that I'm not able to perceive what it is that someone else did.
Every "mistake" is an opportunity in jazz.
So it's hard to even describe what a funny note would be.
So for example, if I played a color, like we were playing on a palette, that sounded like this ...
(Music) So if Christian played a note -- like play an F.
(Music) See, these are all right inside of the color palette.
If you played an E.
See, these all lie right inside of this general emotional palette that we were painting.
If you played an F# though, (Dissonance) to most people's ears, they would perceive that as a mistake.
So I'm going to show you, we're going to play just for a second.
And we're going to play on this palette.
And at some point, Christian will introduce this note.
And we won't react to it.
He'll introduce it for a second and then I'll stop, I'll talk for a second.
We'll see what happens when we play with this palette.
(Music) So someone could conceptually perceive that as a mistake.
The only way that I would say it was a mistake is in that we didn't react to it.
It was an opportunity that was missed.
So it's unpredictable.
We'll paint this palette again.
He'll play it.
I don't know how we'll react to it, but something will change.
We'll all accept his ideas, or not.
(Music) So you see, he played this note.
I ended up creating a melody out of it.
The texture changed in the drums this time.
It got a little bit more rhythmic, a little bit more intense in response to how I responded to it.
So there is no mistake.
The only mistake is if I'm not aware, if each individual musician is not aware and accepting enough of his fellow band member to incorporate the idea and we don't allow for creativity.
So jazz, this bandstand is absolutely amazing.
It's a very purifying experience.

