(Laughter) Knowing your country to be economical conducive for investment, and your people as transparent and trustworthy to engage in business, on which premise I write you.
(Laughter) Before my father death, he had the sum of 23 million United States dollars, which he kept away from the rebel leaders during the course of the war.
(Laughter) This fund was supposed to be used for the rehabilitation of water reserves all over the country, before the outbreak of war.
When the war broke out, the rebel leader demanded the fund be given to him, my father insisted it was not in his possession, and he was killed because of his refusal to release the fund.
Meanwhile, my mother and I is the only person who knows about it because my father always confide in me.
(Sighs) I made an arrangement with a Red Cross relief worker, who used his official van to transport the money to Lungi Airport, Freetown, although he did not know the real contents of the box.
(Laughter) The fund was deposited as a family reasure, in a safe, reliable security company in Dakar, Senegal, where I was only given temporary asylum.
I do not wish to invest the money in Senegal due to unfavorable economic climate, and so close to my country.
The only assistance I need from you, which I know you would do for me, are the following: one, be a silent partner and receive the funds in your account in trust; two, provide a bank account under your control to which the funds will be remitted; three, receive the funds into your account in trust; take out your commission; and leave the rest of the money until I arrive, after the transfer is complete.
Sincerely, Mr Micheal Bangura."
(Laughter) (Applause) This is really embarrassing.
I was told backstage that I have 18 minutes.
I only prepared 15.
(Laughter) So if it's cool, I'd like to just wait for three.
(Laughter) (Laughter ends) I'm really sorry.
(Laughter) (Applause) What's your name?
(Laughter) Mark Surfas.
It's pretty cool, huh?
Pursuing happiness.
(Laughter) Are you a virgin?
Virgin?
I mean -- no, I mean like in the TED sense?
(Laughter) Are you?
Oh, yeah?
So what are you, like, a thousand, two thousand, somewhere in there?
Huh?
Oh?
You don't know what I'm talking about?
(Laughter) Ah, Mark -- (Laughter) Surfas.
(Laughter) 1,860 -- am I good?
And that's nothing to be ashamed of.
That's nothing to be ashamed of.
(Applause) Yeah, I was hanging out with some Google guys last night.
Really cool, we were getting wasted.
(Laughter) And they were telling me that Google software has gotten so advanced that, based on your interaction with Google over your lifetime, they can actually predict what you are going to say -- (Laughter) next.
And I was like, "Get the fuck out of here.
That's crazy."
(Laughter) But they said, "No, but don't show anyone."
But they slipped up.
And they said that I could just type in "What was I going to say next?"
and my name, and it would tell me.
And I have to tell you, this is an unadulterated piece of software, this is a real Internet browser and this is the actual Google site, and we're going to test it out live today.
What was I going to say next?
And "Ze Frank" -- that's me.
Am I feeling lucky?
(Laughter) (Shouting) Am I feeling lucky?
Audience: Yes!
Yeah!
(Sighs) (Laughter) Ze Frank: Oh!
Amazing.
(Laughter) In March of 2001 -- (Laughter) I filmed myself dancing to Madonna's "Justify My Love."
On a Thursday, I sent out a link to a website that featured those clips to 17 of my closest friends, as part of an invitation to my -- an invitation to my th -- th -- 26th birthday party.
(Laughter) (Clears throat) By Monday, over a million people were coming to this site a day.
(Sighs) (Laughter) Within a week, I received a call from Earthlink that said, due to a 10 cents per megabyte overage charge, I owed them 30,000 dollars.
(Laughter) Needless to say, I was able to leave my job.
(Laughter) And, finally, you know, become freelance.
(Laughter) But some people refer to me more as, like, an Internet guru or -- swami.
(Laughter) I knew I had something.
I'd basically distilled a very difficult-to-explain and complex philosophy, which I won't get into here, because it's a little too deep for all of you, but -- (Laughter) It's about what makes websites popular, and, you know, it's -- It's unfortunate that I don't have more time.
Maybe I can come back next year, or something like that.
(Laughter) I'm obsessed with email.
I get a lot of it.
Four years later, I still get probably two or three hundred emails a day from people I don't know, and it's been an amazing opportunity to kind of get to know different cultures, you know?
It's like a microscope to the rest of the world.
You can kind of peer into other people's lives.
And I also feel like I get a lot of inspiration from the average user.
For example, somebody wrote, "Hey Ze, if you ever come to Boulder, you should rock out with us," and I said, "Why wait?"
(Video) (Music) And they said, "Hey Ze, thanks for rocking out, but I meant the kind of rocking out where we'd be naked."
(Laughter) And that was embarrassing.
But you know, it's kind of a collaboration between me and the fans, so I said, "Sure."
(Video) (Music) (Laughter) I hear a lot of you whispering.
(Laughter) And I know what you're saying, "Holy crap!
How is his presentation so smooth?"
(Laughter) And I have to say that it's not all me this year.
I guess Chris has to take some credit here, because in years past, I guess there's been some sort of subpar speakers at TED.
I don't know.
And so, this year, Chris sent us a TED conference simulator.
(Laughter) Which really allowed us as speakers to get there, in the trenches, and practice at home so that we would be ready for this experience.
And I've got to say that, you know, it's really, really great to be here.
(Pre-recorded applause) I'd like to tell all of you a little joke.
(Pre-recorded applause and cheering) Not just the good stuff, though.
You can do heckler mode.
Voice: Hey, moron, get off the stage!
ZF: You get off the stage.
(Laughter) Voice: We want Malcolm Gladwell.
(Laughter) (Baby cooing) (Huge crowd applauding) In case you run over time.
(Heroic music) Just one last thing I'd like to say, I'd, really -- (Laughter) I'd like to thank all of you for being here.
(Loud music) (Laughter) And frog mode.
(Singing) (Sings) "Ah, the first time that I made love to a rock shrimp --" (Laughter) (Sighs) It's true.
Some people say to me, "Ze, you're doing all this stuff, this Internet stuff, and you're not making any money."
(Laughter) "Why?"
And I say, "Mom, Dad -- (Laughter) I'm trying."
I don't know if you're all aware of this, but the video game market, kids are playing these video games, but, supposedly, there's tons of money.
I mean, like, I think, 100,000 dollars or so a year is being spent on these things.
So I decided to try my hand.
I came up with a few games.
(Laughter) This is called "Atheist."
I figured it would be popular with the young kids.
OK.
Look, I'll move around and say some things.
(Sighs) [Game over.
There is no replay.]
(Laughter) So that didn't go over so well.
(Laughter) I don't really understand why you're laughing.
(Laughter) Should have done this before I tried to pitch it.
"Buddhist," of course, looks very, very similar to "Atheist."
(Laughter) But you come back as a duck.
(Laughter) And this is great because, you know, for a quarter, you can play this for a long time.
(Laughter) And Chris had said in an email that we should really bring something new to TED, something that we haven't shown anyone.
So, I made this for TED.
It's "Christian."
It's the third in the series.
I'm hoping it's going to do well this year.
(Sighs) (Laughter) Do you have a preference?
(Laughter) Good choice.
(Laughter) So you can wait for the Second Coming, which is a random number between one and 500 million.
(Laughter) So really, what are we talking about here?
Oh, tech joy.
(Laughter) Tech joy, to me, means something, because I get a lot of joy out of tech.
And in fact, making things using technology -- and I'm being serious here, even though I'm using my sarcastic voice -- I won't -- hold on.
Making things, you know -- making things actually does give me a lot of joy.
It's the process of creation that keeps me sort of a bubble and a half above perpetual anxiety in my life, and it's that feeling of being about 80 percent complete on a project -- where you know you still have something to do, but it's not finished, and you're not starting something -- that really fills my entire life.
And so, what I've done is, I started getting interested in creating online social spaces to share that feeling with people who don't consider themselves artists.
We're in a culture of guru-ship.
It's so hard to use some software because, you know, it's unapproachable, people feel like they have to read the manual.
So I try to create these very minimal activities that allow people to express themselves, and, hopefully -- ("The End" by The Doors) Whoa!
I'm like -- on the page, but it doesn't exist.
(Laughter) It's, like -- seriously, though -- (Laughter) I try to create meaningful environments for people to express themselves.
(Laughter) Here I created a contest called, "When Office Supplies Attack," which, I think, really resonated with the working population.
(Laughter) Over 500 entries in three weeks.
Toilet paper fashion.
(Laughter) Again, people from all over the country.
The watch is particularly incredible.
(Laughter) Online drawing tools -- you've probably seen a lot of them.
I think they're wonderful.
It's a chance for people to get to play with crayons and all that kind of stuff.
But I'm interested in the process of creating, as the real event that I'm interested in.
And the problem is that a lot of people suck at drawing, and they get bummed out at this, sort of, you know, stick figure, awful little thing that they created.
And eventually, it just makes them stop playing with it, or they draw penises and things like that.
(Laughter) So, the Scribbler is an attempt to create a generative tool.
In other words, it's a helping tool.
You can draw your simple stick figure, and it collaborates with you to create sort of a post-war German etching.
(Laughter) In fact, it's tuned to be better at drawing things that look worse.
So, we go ahead, and we start scribbling.
So the idea is that you can really, you know, partake in this process, but watch something really crappy look beautiful.
And here are some of my favorites.
This is the little trap marionette that was submitted to me.
Very cool.
(Laughter) Darling.
Beautiful stuff.
I mean this is incredible.
An 11-year-old girl drew this and submitted it.
It's just gorgeous.
(Laughter) I'm dead serious here.
This is not a joke.
(Laughter) But, I think it's a really fun and wonderful thing.
So this is called the "Fiction Project."
This is an online space, which is basically a refurbished message board that encourages collaborative fiction writing.
These are haikus.
None of the haikus were written by the same person.
In fact, each line is contributed by a different person at a different time.
I think that the "now tied up, tied down, mistress cruel approaches me, now tied down, it's up."
It's an amazing way, and I'll tell you, if you come home, and your spouse, or whoever it is, says, "Let's talk" -- That, like, chills you to the very core.
(Laughter) But it's peripheral activities like these that allow people to get together, doing fun things.
They actually get to know each other, and it's sort of like low-threshold peripheral activities that I think are the key to bringing up some of our bonding social capital that we're lacking.
And very, very quickly -- I love puppets.
Here's a puppet.
It dances to music.
Lotte Reiniger, an amazing shadow puppeteer in the 20s, that started doing more elaborate things.
I became interested in puppets, and I just want to show one last thing to you.
Oh, this is how you make puppets.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Ze Frank.
(Applause)
Today, we are a country divided, or at least that's what we're told.
We are torn apart by immigration, education, guns and health care.
Health care is ugly and it is loud, so loud that it threatens to drown out everything else.
(Voice-over) Protesters: Health care is a human right!
Fight, fight, fight!
Protesters: Hey hey!
Ho ho!
Obamacare has got to go!
Rebecca Onie: But what if underneath all the noise, we're not divided?
What if the things that we don't ask about are the things that we most agree upon?
It turns out that when we ask the right questions, the answers are startling, because we agree, not on health care, but on something more important: we agree on health.
For 20 years, I've been obsessed with one question: What do we, what do all of us need in order to be healthy?
As a college student in 1995, I spent months talking to physicians at a chaotic hospital in Boston, asking them, "What's the one thing your patients most need to be healthy?"
They shared the same story again and again, one that I've heard hundreds of variations of since.
They say, "Every day I see a patient with an asthma exacerbation, and I prescribe a controller medication.
But I know she is living in a mold-infested apartment.
Or I see a kid with an ear infection, and I prescribe antibiotics, but I know there is no food at home.
And I don't ask about those issues, because there's nothing I can do."
Now, it seemed that it shouldn't be so complicated to design a doctor's visit around what people actually need to be healthy.
So I created Health Leads, an organization enabling thousands of physicians and other caregivers to ask their patients, "What do you need to be healthy?"
and then prescribe those things -- fruits and vegetables, heat in the winter, electricity to refrigerate their medication -- and we then navigated patients to those resources in their communities.
The model works.
A Mass General Hospital study found that navigating patients to essential resources is associated with improvements in blood pressure and cholesterol levels similar to introducing a new drug, but without all the side effects.
So two decades later, what's changed?
It's now widely recognized that just 20 percent of health outcomes are tied to medical care, whereas up to 70 percent are tied to healthy behaviors and what's called the social determinants of health -- basically, everything that happens to us for that vast majority of time when we're not in the doctor's office or the hospital.
Health care executives now routinely remind us that our zip code matters more than our genetic code.
And one health care publication even recently had the audacity to describe the social determinants of health as "the feel-good buzzword of the year."
Now, there's been some action, too.
Over the past decade, six major health care providers and insurers have committed over 600 million dollars to affordable housing, recognizing that it reduces infant mortality and increases life expectancy.
But let's be honest.
Is our 3.5 trillion dollar health care system fundamentally designed to create health?
Absolutely not.
Take access to healthy food.
Not long ago, a teenage boy shows up at a hospital in Baltimore, losing weight.
Just as his doctors are huddled up figuring out which metabolic panels and blood tests to run, one of my colleagues asks out loud, "Do you think he might be hungry?"
It turned out that this kid had been kicked out of his housing and literally hadn't had a meal in weeks.
He said he was "... so relieved that somebody finally asked me."
Somehow, we've created a health care system where asking a patient "Are you hungry?"
is so far outside the bounds of what counts as health care that we mostly fail or forget to ask altogether; where doctors lament a hospital's "no third sandwich policy," meaning that if you're a hungry patient in the ER, you can have only two free sandwiches, but as many MRIs as the doctor orders; where, in 2016 in the state of Texas, they spent 1.2 billion dollars on the medical costs of malnutrition instead of on access to healthy food; where a Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services program stratifies hungry patients, so that some get access to food and some get information about food, with the justification that doing nothing for hungry patients is standard and usual care in this country.
And that's just food.
The same is true for housing, electricity ...
The bottom line is, health care may be changing, but not by enough and certainly not fast enough.
We ask the wrong questions of our doctors, of our patients, but also of our citizens.
We ask about and argue about health care, but how do voters think about health?
No one could tell us the answer to that question, so we launched a new initiative and hired a polling firm to ask voters across the country: What do you need to be healthy?
What was so striking about this was that no one has any clue what we are talking about in health care.
Voters do not think the social determinants of health is a feel-good phrase.
They actually hate it.
"What uneducated person came up with that language?"
one of the voters said.
Or my favorite was the guy who said, "You're killing me."
But when you strip away all the ridiculousness of our language in health care, we know exactly what creates health.
So take Charlotte, North Carolina.
We had two focus groups, one of African American Democratic women and one of white Republican women.
And we asked them, "If you had a hundred dollars, how would you spend it to buy health in your community?
Turns out, they agree nearly to the last percentage point.
First, they agree that health care only sort of impacts health.
So they choose to spend the majority of their dollars outside of hospitals and clinics.
And second, they agree on what creates health, spending 19 percent on affordable housing and about 25 percent on access to healthy food.
So I am sure you are thinking, "This has got to be a fluke."
But it's not.
White and Latino male swing voters in Seattle, white and African American Democratic voters in Cleveland, white male Republicans in Dallas, low-income white Democrats in Hendersonville, North Carolina: their answers are strikingly similar, with all of them choosing to spend more money on healthy food and safe housing than they would on hospitals and health centers.
When you ask the right questions, it becomes pretty clear: we may be fractured on health care in this country, but we are unified on health.
The thing that I've been struggling with is why.
Why do we agree on health?
We agree on health because it is common sense.
We all know that the things we need to get healthy -- medicine and medical care -- are not the things we need to be healthy, to not get sick in the first place.
But we also agree because of common experience.
In a study of 5,000 patients, 24 percent of the patients with commercial health insurance -- meaning, they had a job -- still ran out of food or struggled to find housing or transportation or other essential resources.
Twenty-four percent.
And we saw the same thing in our focus groups.
Nearly every voter knew what it meant to struggle, either themselves or their families or their neighbors.
One of those white Republican women in Charlotte was a waitress struggling to stay awake with an enormous Big Gulp soda.
She just looked exhausted.
And she was.
She told us that she worked two jobs but still could not afford a membership to the Y, but it was OK that she couldn't go to the gym, she said, because she also could not afford gas and walked 10 miles to and from work every single day.
Listening to her, I felt this familiar panic rise in me, the residue of my own childhood.

