Oh my God, everybody can see I'm stupid.
I didn't get invited to the Christmas party!"
So you've got this nagging loop tape that goes over and over again that drives you insane, so, you see what the problem is?
What once made you safe now drives you insane.
I'm sorry to be the bearer of bad news, but somebody has to be.
Your pets are happier than you are.
(Laughter) (Applause) So kitty cat, meow, happy happy happy, human beings, screwed.
(Laughter) Completely and utterly -- so, screwed.
But my point is, if we don't talk about this stuff, and we don't learn how to deal with our lives, it's not going to be one in four.
It's going to be four in four who are really, really going to get ill in the upstairs department.
And while we're at it, can we please stop the stigma?
Thank you.
(Applause) (Applause) Thank you.
Imagine if your daily commute involved tens of kilometers on these kinds of roads, driving this kind of vehicle, without any nearby service stations or breakdown assistance.
For millions of drivers in many parts of Africa, this is the norm.
Since over 90 percent of passenger cars are imported, often used, they're just not designed for local usage.
High import duties often compound the problem, sometimes doubling the price of a car.
So most vehicles are either too expensive or too unreliable for the average consumer.
Well-designed vehicles are only part of the transport challenge, though.
For every 100 adults in Africa, less than five people actually own a vehicle.
Public transport is available, and in countries like Kenya, it's often run by local entrepreneurs using minivans like this.
But in most rural and peri-urban areas, it's fragmented and unreliable.
In more remote areas without transport, people have to walk, typically tens of kilometers, to get to school or collect clean drinking water or buy supplies from nearby markets.
Bad roads, disparate communities, low average income levels and inadequate vehicles all impair the transport system and ultimately constrain economic output.
Despite this constraint, the Pan-African economy is booming.
Combined GDP is already over two trillion dollars.
This is a massive commercial and social opportunity, not a helpless continent.
So why isn't there already something better?
Around the world, automotive is quarter the manufacturing sector.
But in Africa, it's generally been overlooked by carmakers, who are focused on larger, established markets and emerging economies like India and China.
This lack of industrialization, which itself creates a vicious-cycle barrier to the emergence of industry, has caused the dependence on imports.
There is a supply-demand disconnect, with the vast majority of automotive spending on the continent today, essentially funding an international network of car exporters instead of fueling the growth of local industry.
It's entirely possible to solve this disconnect, though, starting with products that people actually want.
And this is what motivated me to start Mobius, to build a vehicle in Africa, for Africa.
To us, this meant reimagining the car around the needs of the consumer, simplifying nonessential features like interior fixtures and investing in performance-critical systems like suspension to create durable and affordable vehicles built for purpose.
And built for purpose is exactly where we started with our first-generation model, Mobius II, which was designed as a really rugged, low-cost SUV, able to handle heavy loads and rough terrain reliably.
This launched in 2015, and we've now developed the next-generation version based on customer feedback.
For high stress and heavy loading, we engineered a sturdy steel space frame.
To handle acute vibration from rough roads, we ruggedized the suspension.
For potholes and uneven terrain, high ground clearance was a no-brainer.
And to make this something customers could actually be proud to drive in, we designed an aspirational body aesthetic.
Underpinning all of this, we simplified or eliminated components like parking sensors and automatic windows wherever we could, to keep costs low and sell this at half the price of a five-year-old SUV in Kenya today.
The new -- (Applause) The new Mobius II launches in 2018.
And while durable, affordable vehicles like this are vital, a broader solution to immobility needs to go further.
Over the last decade, a transport-centric, shared economy has connected people across Africa with minivans, auto rickshaws and sedans.
It's just not operated very effectively or efficiently.
Enabling better access to transport is all about strengthening this public transit network, empowering local entrepreneurs who already offer similar services in their communities to operate these services more profitably and more widely.
With this aim, we're taking human-centered design a step further and developing a transport platform model, which enables owners to plug in different modules, like a goods cage or ambulance unit, and run other services like goods delivery or medical transport, as well as public transport.
Transportation services like this are the fundamental driver of logistics, trade, social services, access to education, health care and employment.
The transportation grid to physical economies is akin to the internet to virtual economies.
And the impact of increased mobility is only part of the potential here.
Since the late 1700s, the Industrial Revolution has catapulted the development of economies around the world into thriving societies.
Today, manufacturing is still the engine of economic growth and stability, even as new technologies have inevitably transformed the way we live.
Making stuff is important, especially for nation-states wanting to boost employment, increase skills and reduce import dependence.
But while few countries can skip this industrialized stage, many have negligible manufacturing output.
There are various reasons for this, but one reason is universal: hardware is hard.
(Laughter) So what are the challenges to industry, and how are we approaching them?
The first issue many people think of is a lack of skilled labor.
In areas where access to good primary and secondary education are limited and employment opportunities are scarce, a small skill base is inevitable.
But that doesn't mean it's immutable.
There's an abundance of smart, hardworking and ambitious people in Africa, obviously.
What's really lacking are good jobs that offer a path not just to employment but also professional growth.
The first person we employed at Mobius over six years ago was a mechanic named Kazungu.
Kazungu had gone to school up to the age of 18 and worked as an odd-job mechanic.
Joining the company at the time was a near-vertical learning curve.
But he rose to the challenge, and with more technical guidance from an expanding engineering team, he's grown over the years to lead a group of mechanics in R&amp;D prototyping.
A thirst for learning and the work ethic to step up to a challenge are values we now recruit on.
Pairing innate values like this with on-the-job training and systems has strengthened our skill base.
This works really well on the production line, where work can be systematized around clear procedural instructions and then reinforced through training.
In our experience, it is possible to build a skilled workforce, and we plan to hire hundreds more people using this approach.
A second challenge is a lack of suppliers.
In countries like Kenya, there are only a handful of automotive suppliers manufacturing parts like electrical harnesses, seats and glass.
It's a burgeoning group, and without much demand from industry, most of these suppliers have no impetus to grow.
We've worked hard with a few of them to develop the capacity to consistently manufacture components at the quality levels we need, like this supplier in Nairobi, who are helping to reduce the production cost of metal brackets and improve their ability to build conformant parts to our engineering drawings.
Supply and development is standard practice in automotive globally, but it needs to be applied from the ground up with a vast majority of local suppliers to properly bolster the ecosystem.
And as production volumes rise, these suppliers can employ more staff, invest in better equipment and continue to develop new manufacturing techniques to further increase output.
Building up skills and suppliers are not the only hurdles to local industrialization, but they're good examples of how we think about the challenge.
You see, we're not just reimagining the car, we're reimagining our entire value chain.
None of this has been easy, and we're only just getting started.
But once African industry starts to scale, the potential is huge.
Better products, costing less, built locally, together creating millions of jobs.
Frugal innovation offers a path to economic acceleration across many industries, and the future of this continent depends on it.
The Africa 2.0 I believe in can apply locally relevant design and a commitment to solving its industrial challenges to create a more connected, more prosperous future, not just for the privileged few, but for everyone.
Thank you.
(Applause)
About 12 years ago, I gave up my career in banking to try to make the world a safer place.
This involved a journey into national and global advocacy and meeting some of the most extraordinary people in the world.
In the process, I became a civil society diplomat.
Civil society diplomats do three things: They voice the concerns of the people, are not pinned down by national interests, and influence change through citizen networks, not only state ones.
And if you want to change the world, we need more of them.
But many people still ask, "Can civil society really make a big difference?
Can citizens influence and shape national and global policy?"
I never thought I would ask myself these questions, but here I am to share some lessons about two powerful civil society movements that I've been involved in.
They are in issues that I'm passionate about: gun control and drug policy.
And these are issues that matter here.
Latin America is ground zero for both of them.
For example, Brazil -- this beautiful country hosting TEDGlobal has the world's ugliest record.
We are the number one champion in homicidal violence.
One in every 10 people killed around the world is a Brazilian.
This translates into over 56,000 people dying violently each year.
Most of them are young, black boys dying by guns.
Brazil is also one of the world's largest consumers of drugs, and the War on Drugs has been especially painful here.
Around 50 percent of the homicides in the streets in Brazil are related to the War on Drugs.
The same is true for about 25 percent of people in jail.
And it's not just Brazil that is affected by the twin problems of guns and drugs.
Virtually every country and city across Central and South America is in trouble.
Latin America has nine percent of the world's population, but 25 percent of its global violent deaths.
These are not problems we can run away from.
I certainly could not.
So the first campaign I got involved with started here in 2003 to change Brazil's gun law and to create a program to buy back weapons.
In just a few years, we not only changed national legislation that made it much more difficult for civilians to buy a gun, but we collected and destroyed almost half a million weapons.
This was one of the biggest buyback programs in history -- (Applause) -- but we also suffered some setbacks.
We lost a referendum to ban gun sales to civilians in 2005.
The second initiative was also home-grown, but is today a global movement to reform the international drug control regime.
I am the executive coordinator of something called the Global Commission on Drug Policy.
The commission is a high-level group of global leaders brought together to identify more humane and effective approaches to the issue of drugs.
Since we started in 2008, the taboo on drugs is broken.
Across the Americas, from the US and Mexico to Colombia and Uruguay, change is in the air.
But rather than tell you the whole story about these two movements, I just want to share with you four key insights.
I call them lessons to change the world.
There are certainly many more, but these are the ones that stand out to me.
So the first lesson is: Change and control the narrative.
It may seem obvious, but a key ingredient to civil society diplomacy is first changing and then controlling the narrative.
This is something that veteran politicians understand, but that civil society groups generally do not do very well.
In the case of drug policy, our biggest success has been to change the discussion away from prosecuting a War on Drugs to putting people's health and safety first.
In a cutting-edge report we just launched in New York, we also showed that the groups benefiting most from this $320 billion market are criminal gangs and cartels.
So in order to undermine the power and profit of these groups, we need to change the conversation.
We need to make illegal drugs legal.
But before I get you too excited, I don't mean drugs should be a free-for-all.
What I'm talking about, and what the Global Commission advocates for is creating a highly regulated market, where different drugs would have different degrees of regulation.
As for gun control, we were successful in changing, but not so much in controlling, the narrative.
And this brings me to my next lesson: Never underestimate your opponents.
If you want to succeed in changing the world, you need to know who you're up against.
You need to learn their motivations and points of view.
In the case of gun control, we really underestimated our opponents.
After a very successful gun-collection program, we were elated.
We had support from 80 percent of Brazilians, and thought that this could help us win the referendum to ban gun sales to civilians.
But we were dead wrong.
During a televised 20-day public debate, our opponent used our own arguments against us.
We ended up losing the popular vote.
It was really terrible.
The National Rifle Association -- yes, the American NRA -- came to Brazil.
They inundated our campaign with their propaganda, that as you know, links the right to own guns to ideas of freedom and democracy.
They simply threw everything at us.
They used our national flag, our independence anthem.
They invoked women's rights and misused images of Mandela, Tiananmen Square, and even Hitler.
They won by playing with people's fears.
In fact, guns were almost completely ignored in their campaign.
Their focus was on individual rights.
But I ask you, which right is more important, the right to life or the right to have a gun that takes life away?
(Applause) We thought people would vote in defense of life, but in a country with a recent past of military dictatorship, the anti-government message of our opponents resonated, and we were not prepared to respond.
Lesson learned.
We've been more successful in the case of drug policy.
If you asked most people 10 years ago if an end to the War on Drugs was possible, they would have laughed.
After all, there are huge military police prisons and financial establishments benefiting from this war.
But today, the international drug control regime is starting to crumble.
Governments and civil societies are experimenting with new approaches.
The Global Commission on Drug Policy really knew its opposition, and rather than fighting them, our chair -- former Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso -- reached out to leaders from across the political spectrum, from liberals to conservatives.
This high level group agreed to honestly discuss the merits and flaws of drug policies.
It was this reasoned, informed and strategic discussion that revealed the sad truth about the War on Drugs.
The War on Drugs has simply failed across every metric.
Drugs are cheaper and more available than ever, and consumption has risen globally.
But even worse, it also generated massive negative unintended consequences.
It is true that some people have made these arguments before, but we've made a difference by anticipating the arguments of our opponents and by leveraging powerful voices that a few years ago would probably have resisted change.
Third lesson: Use data to drive your argument.
Guns and drugs are emotive issues, and as we've painfully learned in the gun referendum campaign in Brazil, sometimes it's impossible to cut through the emotions and get to the facts.
But this doesn't mean that we shouldn't try.
Until quite recently, we simply didn't know how many Brazilians were killed by guns.
Amazingly, it was a local soap opera called "Mulheres Apaixonadas" -- or "Women in Love" -- that kicked off Brazil's national gun control campaign.
In one highly viewed episode, a soap opera lead actress was killed by a stray bullet.
Brazilian grannies and housewives were outraged, and in a case of art imitating life, this episode also included footage of a real gun control march that we had organized right here, outside in Copacabana Beach.
The televised death and march had a huge impact on public opinion.
Within weeks, our national congress approved the disarmament bill that had been languishing for years.
We were then able to mobilize data to show the successful outcomes of the change in the law and gun collection program.
Here is what I mean: We could prove that in just one year, we saved more than 5,000 lives.
(Applause) And in the case of drugs, in order to undermine this fear and prejudice that surrounds the issue, we managed to gather and present data that shows that today's drug policies cause much more harm than drug use per se, and people are starting to get it.
My fourth insight is: Don't be afraid to bring together odd bedfellows.
What we've learned in Brazil -- and this doesn't only apply to my country -- is the importance of bringing diverse and eclectic folks together.
If you want to change the world, it helps to have a good cross-section of society on your side.
In both the case of guns and drugs, we brought together a wonderful mix of people.
We mobilized the elite and got huge support from the media.
We gathered the victims, human rights champions, cultural icons.
We also assembled the professional classes -- doctors, lawyers, academia and more.
What I've learned over the last years is that you need coalitions of the willing and of the unwilling to make change.
In the case of drugs, we needed libertarians, anti-prohibitionists, legalizers, and liberal politicians.
They may not agree on everything; in fact, they disagree on almost everything.
But the legitimacy of the campaign is based on their diverse points of view.
Over a decade ago, I had a comfortable future working for an investment bank.
I was as far removed from the world of civil society diplomacy as you can imagine.
But I took a chance.
I changed course, and on the way, I helped to create social movements that I believe have made some parts of the world safer.
Each and every one of us has the power to change the world.
No matter what the issue, and no matter how hard the fight, civil society is central to the blueprint for change.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The future of life, where the unraveling of our biology -- and bring up the lights a little bit.
I don't have any slides.
I'm just going to talk -- about where that's likely to carry us.
And you know, I saw all the visions of the first couple of sessions.
It almost made me feel a little bit guilty about having an uplifting talk about the future.
It felt wrong to do that in some way.
And yet, I don't really think it is because when it comes down to it, it's this larger trajectory that is really what is going to remain -- what people in the future are going to remember about this period.
I want to talk to you a little bit about why the visions of Jeremy Rivkins, who would like to ban these sorts of technologies, or of the Bill Joys who would like to relinquish them, are actually -- to follow those paths would be such a tragedy for us.
I'm focusing on biology, the biological sciences.
The reason I'm doing that is because those are going to be the areas that are the most significant to us.
The reason for that is really very simple.
It's because we're flesh and blood.
We're biological creatures.
And what we can do with our biology is going to shape our future and that of our children and that of their children -- whether we gain control over aging, whether we learn to protect ourselves from Alzheimer's, and heart disease, and cancer.
I think that Shakespeare really put it very nicely.
And I'm actually going to use his words in the same order that he did.
(Laughter) He said, "And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe.
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot.
And thereby hangs a tale."

