Rich countries like Sweden need to start reducing emissions by at least 15 percent every year.
And that is so that we can stay below a two-degree warming target.
Yet, as the IPCC have recently demonstrated, aiming instead for 1.5 degrees Celsius would significantly reduce the climate impacts.
But we can only imagine what that means for reducing emissions.
You would think the media and every one of our leaders would be talking about nothing else, but they never even mention it.
Nor does anyone ever mention the greenhouse gases already locked in the system.
Nor that air pollution is hiding a warming so that when we stop burning fossil fuels, we already have an extra level of warming perhaps as high as 0.5 to 1.1 degrees Celsius.
Furthermore does hardly anyone speak about the fact that we are in the midst of the sixth mass extinction, with up to 200 species going extinct every single day, that the extinction rate today is between 1,000 and 10,000 times higher than what is seen as normal.
Nor does hardly anyone ever speak about the aspect of equity or climate justice, clearly stated everywhere in the Paris Agreement, which is absolutely necessary to make it work on a global scale.
That means that rich countries need to get down to zero emissions within 6 to 12 years, with today's emission speed.
And that is so that people in poorer countries can have a chance to heighten their standard of living by building some of the infrastructure that we have already built, such as roads, schools, hospitals, clean drinking water, electricity, and so on.
Because how can we expect countries like India or Nigeria to care about the climate crisis if we who already have everything don't care even a second about it or our actual commitments to the Paris Agreement?
So, why are we not reducing our emissions?
Why are they in fact still increasing?
Are we knowingly causing a mass extinction?
Are we evil?
No, of course not.
People keep doing what they do because the vast majority doesn't have a clue about the actual consequences of our everyday life, and they don't know that rapid change is required.
We all think we know, and we all think everybody knows, but we don't.
Because how could we?
If there really was a crisis, and if this crisis was caused by our emissions, you would at least see some signs.
Not just flooded cities, tens of thousands of dead people, and whole nations leveled to piles of torn down buildings.
You would see some restrictions.
But no.
And no one talks about it.
There are no emergency meetings, no headlines, no breaking news.
No one is acting as if we were in a crisis.
Even most climate scientists or green politicians keep on flying around the world, eating meat and dairy.
If I live to be 100, I will be alive in the year 2103.
When you think about the future today, you don't think beyond the year 2050.
By then, I will, in the best case, not even have lived half of my life.
What happens next?
The year 2078, I will celebrate my 75th birthday.
If I have children or grandchildren, maybe they will spend that day with me.
Maybe they will ask me about you, the people who were around, back in 2018.
Maybe they will ask why you didn't do anything while there still was time to act.
What we do or don't do right now will affect my entire life and the lives of my children and grandchildren.
What we do or don't do right now, me and my generation can't undo in the future.
So when school started in August of this year, I decided that this was enough.
I set myself down on the ground outside the Swedish parliament.
I school striked for the climate.
Some people say that I should be in school instead.
Some people say that I should study to become a climate scientist so that I can "solve the climate crisis."
But the climate crisis has already been solved.
We already have all the facts and solutions.
All we have to do is to wake up and change.
And why should I be studying for a future that soon will be no more when no one is doing anything whatsoever to save that future?
And what is the point of learning facts in the school system when the most important facts given by the finest science of that same school system clearly means nothing to our politicians and our society.
Some people say that Sweden is just a small country, and that it doesn't matter what we do, but I think that if a few children can get headlines all over the world just by not coming to school for a few weeks, imagine what we could all do together if you wanted to.
(Applause) Now we're almost at the end of my talk, and this is where people usually start talking about hope, solar panels, wind power, circular economy, and so on, but I'm not going to do that.
We've had 30 years of pep-talking and selling positive ideas.
And I'm sorry, but it doesn't work.
Because if it would have, the emissions would have gone down by now.
They haven't.
And yes, we do need hope, of course we do.
But the one thing we need more than hope is action.
Once we start to act, hope is everywhere.
So instead of looking for hope, look for action.
Then, and only then, hope will come.
Today, we use 100 million barrels of oil every single day.
There are no politics to change that.
There are no rules to keep that oil in the ground.
So we can't save the world by playing by the rules, because the rules have to be changed.
Everything needs to change -- and it has to start today.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The one conversation that uplifted me more than any other in my life was with a woman who told me how, a few days earlier, she drove her Jeep Wrangler to the edge of the Grand Canyon and sat there, revving the engine, thinking about driving over.
Even though I had severe social anxiety, in that conversation, I was totally at ease.
(Laughter) She told me what was going on in her life in the days and months leading up, what her thoughts were at that exact moment, why she wanted to die, and why she didn't do it.
We nodded and half-smiled, and then it was my turn to talk about my journey to a dining table in the hygienic community area of the mental health wing of a mountain-town hospital.
I took too many sleeping pills, and after they treated me for that, they were like, "Hey, we would love it if you would be our guest in the psych ward."
(Laughter) We joked that her suicide would have made a way better postcard.
(Laughter) We talked shop.
(Laughter) She allowed me to be deeply depressed and have a genuine connection to another person, simultaneously.
For the first time, I identified as somebody living with depression, and I felt good about it -- like I wasn't a bad person for it.
Now imagine one of the people at that table was a member of your family or a close friend.
Would you be comfortable talking to them?
What if instead of the hospital, they were at your kitchen table and told you they were really depressed?
The World Health Organization says that depression is the leading cause of ill health and disability worldwide, affecting 350 million people.
The National Institute of Mental Health reports seven percent of Americans experiencing depression in a year.
So depression is super common, yet in my experience, most folks don't want to talk to depressed people unless we pretend to be happy.
A cheerful facade is appropriate for casual interactions.
A depressed person can ask for extra syrup in their pumpkin spice latte without explaining that they need it because they're trapped in the infinite darkness of their soul and they've lost all hope of escape -- (Laughter) again.
(Laughter) Depression doesn't diminish a person's desire to connect with other people, just their ability.
So in spite of what you might think, talking to friends and family living with depression can be really easy and maybe even fun.
Not, like, Facebook-selfie-with-Lady-Gaga- at-an-underground-party fun -- I'm talking about the kind of fun where people enjoy each other's company effortlessly.
Nobody feels awkward, and no one accuses the sad person of ruining the holidays.
Why does this chasm even exist?
On the one side, you have people living with depression who may act in off-putting or confusing ways because they're fighting a war in their head that nobody else can see.
On the other side, the vast majority of people look across the chasm and shake their heads, like, "Why you gotta be so depressed?"
You may recognize a divide like this in your life.
Do you want to build a bridge across it?
You may not want to build a bridge -- and that's a totally valid choice.
Or maybe you'd like to build a stronger connection, but you have a lot of questions and concerns.
You're what I might call "bridge curious."
(Laughter) Here are some possible reasons why some of you may avoid depressed people.
You might be afraid that if you talk to somebody while they're depressed, you're suddenly responsible for their well-being.
You're not expected to be Dr. Phil.
Just be friendly -- more like Ellen.
(Laughter) You may worry that you won't know what to say, and every attempt at conversation will be awkward, and the only time you'll feel comfortable is when you both just give up on talking and stare at your phones.
Words are not the most important thing to focus on.
You might fear seeing your shadow.
Hey, if you have been successfully outrunning your personal emotional demons, that's awesome.
May the wind be at your back.
(Laughter) You can be the least woo-woo person in the world and still connect with depressed people.
Maybe you've heard that depression is contagious, and you're afraid of catching it.
Bring some hand sanitizer.
(Laughter) You're much more likely to catch the joy of human bonding.
Maybe you see depressed people differently.
You think of them as flawed or defective.
Multiple university studies have shown that A students are more likely to have bipolar condition.
Our brains aren't broken or damaged, they just work differently.
I spent a lot of years thinking happy people just don't get it.
(Laughter) I did eventually stop discriminating against happy people -- (Laughter) I began battling depression when I was eight, and decades later, to my surprise, I started winning.
I shifted from being miserable much of the time to enjoying life.
I live pretty well with my bipolar condition, and I've overcome some other mental health conditions like overeating, addiction and social anxiety.
So I live on both sides of this chasm.
And I'm offering some guidance based on my experience to help you build a bridge across it if you want to.
It's not hard science, but I worked with a lot people I know who've lived with depression to refine these suggestions.
First up, some things you might want to avoid -- some "don'ts."
One of the most off-putting things you can say is, "Just get over it."
Great idea -- love it, it's just we already thought of that.
(Laughter) The absence of the ability to just get over it is depression.
(Laughter) (Applause) We feel it in our bodies -- it's a physical thing for us.
And medically it's no different from telling someone with a broken ankle or cancer, "just get over it."
Don't be hell-bent on fixing us.
Like, thank you, but ...
the pressure can make us depressed people feel like we're disappointing you.
Also, things that make some people feel better may not work for us.
You can't cure clinical depression by getting ice cream ...
which is unfortunate, because that would be living the dream.
(Laughter) Don't take a negative response personally.
So, I have a friend who, about a year ago, messaged me that he was really isolated and depressed.
And I suggested some things for him to do, and he was like, "No, no and no."
And I got mad, like, how dare he not embrace my brilliant wisdom?
(Laughter) And then I remembered times I've been depressed, and how I thought I was doomed in all possible futures, or everybody suddenly hated me, and things like that.
It didn't matter how many people told me otherwise -- I didn't believe them.
So I let my friend know I cared, and I didn't take it personally.
Don't let a lack of bubbly happiness freak you out.
It's not a shark attack.
"Call the coast guard, my friend is sad!"
(Laughter) We can be sad and OK at the same time.
I'm going to say that again, because in our society, we're taught the opposite, and so it's counterintuitive.
People can be sad and OK at the same time.
So some of these things may apply to you personally, some may not.
Take what's useful.
And remember, you don't have to connect.
If you want to, here are some suggestions that may help -- some "dos."
Talk to us in your natural voice, right?
(Laughter) You don't need to put on a sad voice because we're depressed -- you don't sneeze when you're talking to somebody with a cold.
(Laughter) It's not rude to be upbeat.
You can be you, OK?
If you make an offer to be there for us, clearly state what you can and can't do.
I have told people, "Hey, call or text any time, but I might not be able to get back to you that same day."
It's totally cool to not make an offer, or to make a narrow offer with really clear boundaries around it.
Give us a sense of control.
Like, get our consent.
I have a friend who, a while back, when I was having a depressive episode, reached out and said, "Hey, I want to check in with you.
Can I call you every day?
Maybe text you every day and call later in the week?
What works for you?"
By getting my permission, she earned my complete confidence and remains one of my best friends today.
And my last suggestion is: interact about not depression, aka, normal stuff.
I have a friend who, when people were worried about him, they would call and ask if he wanted to go shopping or help them clean out their garage.
Your depressed friends could be a good source of free labor -- (Laughter) What I'm really getting at is, invite them to contribute to your life in some way, even if it's as small as asking you to go see a movie that you wanted to see in the theater.
So that's a lot of dos and don'ts and maybes, and it's not by any means a definitive list.
The thing to remember is that they're all grounded in one guiding principle.
It's what allowed the woman in the Jeep Wrangler to start me on the path to recovery without even trying.
She talked to me like I belonged and contributed exactly as I was at that moment.
If you talk to a depressed person as if their life is just as valuable, intense and beautiful as yours, then there's no need to build a bridge between you, because you've closed the chasm.
Focus on that instead of your words, and it may be the most uplifting conversation of their life.
What could that do for somebody you care about?
What could it do for you?
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to be talking about statistics today.
If that makes you immediately feel a little bit wary, that's OK, that doesn't make you some kind of crazy conspiracy theorist, it makes you skeptical.
And when it comes to numbers, especially now, you should be skeptical.
But you should also be able to tell which numbers are reliable and which ones aren't.
So today I want to try to give you some tools to be able to do that.
But before I do, I just want to clarify which numbers I'm talking about here.
I'm not talking about claims like, "9 out of 10 women recommend this anti-aging cream."
I think a lot of us always roll our eyes at numbers like that.
What's different now is people are questioning statistics like, "The US unemployment rate is five percent."
What makes this claim different is it doesn't come from a private company, it comes from the government.
About 4 out of 10 Americans distrust the economic data that gets reported by government.
Among supporters of President Trump it's even higher; it's about 7 out of 10.
I don't need to tell anyone here that there are a lot of dividing lines in our society right now, and a lot of them start to make sense, once you understand people's relationships with these government numbers.
On the one hand, there are those who say these statistics are crucial, that we need them to make sense of society as a whole in order to move beyond emotional anecdotes and measure progress in an way.
And then there are the others, who say that these statistics are elitist, maybe even rigged; they don't make sense and they don't really reflect what's happening in people's everyday lives.
It kind of feels like that second group is winning the argument right now.
We're living in a world of alternative facts, where people don't find statistics this kind of common ground, this starting point for debate.
This is a problem.
There are actually moves in the US right now to get rid of some government statistics altogether.
Right now there's a bill in congress about measuring racial inequality.
The draft law says that government money should not be used to collect data on racial segregation.
This is a total disaster.
If we don't have this data, how can we observe discrimination, let alone fix it?
In other words: How can a government create fair policies if they can't measure current levels of unfairness?
This isn't just about discrimination, it's everything -- think about it.
How can we legislate on health care if we don't have good data on health or poverty?
How can we have public debate about immigration if we can't at least agree on how many people are entering and leaving the country?
Statistics come from the state; that's where they got their name.
The point was to better measure the population in order to better serve it.
So we need these government numbers, but we also have to move beyond either blindly accepting or blindly rejecting them.
We need to learn the skills to be able to spot bad statistics.
I started to learn some of these when I was working in a statistical department that's part of the United Nations.
Our job was to find out how many Iraqis had been forced from their homes as a result of the war, and what they needed.
It was really important work, but it was also incredibly difficult.
Every single day, we were making decisions that affected the accuracy of our numbers -- decisions like which parts of the country we should go to, who we should speak to, which questions we should ask.
And I started to feel really disillusioned with our work, because we thought we were doing a really good job, but the one group of people who could really tell us were the Iraqis, and they rarely got the chance to find our analysis, let alone question it.
So I started to feel really determined that the one way to make numbers more accurate is to have as many people as possible be able to question them.
So I became a data journalist.
My job is finding these data sets and sharing them with the public.
Anyone can do this, you don't have to be a geek or a nerd.
You can ignore those words; they're used by people trying to say they're smart while pretending they're humble.
Absolutely anyone can do this.
I want to give you guys three questions that will help you be able to spot some bad statistics.
So, question number one is: Can you see uncertainty?
One of things that's really changed people's relationship with numbers, and even their trust in the media, has been the use of political polls.

