And people have been playing around with extra dimensions of space for a very long time, but it's always been an abstract mathematical concept.
I mean, just look around you -- you at the back, look around -- there's clearly only three dimensions of space.
But what if that's not true?
What if the missing gravity is leaking into an extra-spatial dimension that's invisible to you and I?
What if gravity is just as strong as the other forces if you were to view it in this extra-spatial dimension, and what you and I experience is a tiny slice of gravity make it seem very weak?
If this were true, we would have to expand our Standard Model of particles to include an extra particle, a hyperdimensional particle of gravity, a special graviton that lives in extra-spatial dimensions.
I see the looks on your faces.
You should be asking me the question, "How in the world are we going to test this crazy, science fiction idea, stuck as we are in three dimensions?"
The way we always do, by slamming together two protons -- (Laughter) Hard enough that the collision reverberates into any extra-spatial dimensions that might be there, momentarily creating this hyperdimensional graviton that then snaps back into the three dimensions of the LHC and spits off two photons, two particles of light.
And this hypothetical, extra-dimensional graviton is one of the only possible, hypothetical new particles that has the special quantum properties that could give birth to our little, two-photon bump.
So, the possibility of explaining the mysteries of gravity and of discovering extra dimensions of space -- perhaps now you get a sense as to why thousands of physics geeks collectively lost their cool over our little, two-photon bump.
A discovery of this type would rewrite the textbooks.
But remember, the message from us experimentalists that actually were doing this work at the time, was very clear: we need more data.
With more data, the little bump will either turn into a nice, crisp Nobel Prize -- (Laughter) Or the extra data will fill in the space around the bump and turn it into a nice, smooth line.
So we took more data, and with five times the data, several months later, our little bump turned into a smooth line.
The news reported on a "huge disappointment," on "faded hopes," and on particle physicists "being sad."
Given the tone of the coverage, you'd think that we had decided to shut down the LHC and go home.
(Laughter) But that's not what we did.
But why not?
I mean, if I didn't discover a particle -- and I didn't -- if I didn't discover a particle, why am I here talking to you?
Why didn't I just hang my head in shame and go home?
Particle physicists are explorers.
And very much of what we do is cartography.
Let me put it this way: forget about the LHC for a second.
Imagine you are a space explorer arriving at a distant planet, searching for aliens.
What is your first task?
To immediately orbit the planet, land, take a quick look around for any big, obvious signs of life, and report back to home base.
That's the stage we're at now.
We took a first look at the LHC for any new, big, obvious-to-spot particles, and we can report that there are none.
We saw a weird-looking alien bump on a distant mountain, but once we got closer, we saw it was a rock.
But then what do we do?
Do we just give up and fly away?
Absolutely not; we would be terrible scientists if we did.
No, we spend the next couple of decades exploring, mapping out the territory, sifting through the sand with a fine instrument, peeking under every stone, drilling under the surface.
New particles can either show up immediately as big, obvious-to-spot bumps, or they can only reveal themselves after years of data taking.
Humanity has just begun its exploration at the LHC at this big high energy, and we have much searching to do.
But what if, even after 10 or 20 years, we still find no new particles?
We build a bigger machine.
(Laughter) We search at higher energies.
We search at higher energies.
Planning is already underway for a 100-kilometer tunnel that will collide particles at 10 times the energy of the LHC.
We don't decide where nature places new particles.
We only decide to keep exploring.
But what if, even after a 100-kilometer tunnel or a 500-kilometer tunnel or a 10,000-kilometer collider floating in space between the Earth and the Moon, we still find no new particles?
Then perhaps we're doing particle physics wrong.
(Laughter) Perhaps we need to rethink things.
Maybe we need more resources, technology, expertise than what we currently have.
We already use artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques in parts of the LHC, but imagine designing a particle physics experiment using such sophisticated algorithms that it could teach itself to discover a hyperdimensional graviton.
But what if?
What if the ultimate question: What if even artificial intelligence can't help us answer our questions?
What if these open questions, for centuries, are destined to be unanswered for the foreseeable future?
What if the stuff that's bothered me since I was a little kid is destined to be unanswered in my lifetime?
Then that ...
will be even more fascinating.
We will be forced to think in completely new ways.
We'll have to go back to our assumptions, and determine if there was a flaw somewhere.
And we'll need to encourage more people to join us in studying science since we need fresh eyes on these century-old problems.
I don't have the answers, and I'm still searching for them.
But someone -- maybe she's in school right now, maybe she's not even born yet -- could eventually guide us to see physics in a completely new way, and to point out that perhaps we're just asking the wrong questions.
Which would not be the end of physics, but a novel beginning.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Every day of your life, you move through systems of power that other people made.
Do you sense them?
Do you understand power?
Do you realize why it matters?
Power is something we are often uncomfortable talking about.
That's especially true in civic life, how we live together in community.
In a democracy, power is supposed to reside with the people, period.
Any further talk about power and who really has it seems a little dirty, maybe even evil.
But power is no more inherently good or evil than fire or physics.
It just is.
It governs how any form of government works.
It determines who gets to determine the rules of the game.
So learning how power operates is key to being effective, being taken seriously, and not being taken advantage of.
In this lesson, we'll look at where power comes from, how it's exercised and what you can do to become more powerful in public life.
Let's start with a basic definition.
Power is the ability to make others do what you would have them do.
Of course, this plays out in all arenas of life, from family to the workplace to our relationships.
Our focus is on the civic arena, where power means getting a community to make the choices and to take the actions that you want.
There are six main sources of civic power.
First, there's physical force and a capacity for violence.
Control of the means of force, whether in the police or a militia, is power at its most primal.
A second core source of power is wealth.
Money creates the ability to buy results and to buy almost any other kind of power.
The third form of power is state action, government.
This is the use of law and bureaucracy to compel people to do or not do certain things.
In a democracy, for example, we the people, theoretically, give government its power through elections.
In a dictatorship, state power emerges from the threat of force, not the consent of the governed.
The fourth type of power is social norms or what other people think is okay.
Norms don't have the centralized machinery of government.
They operate in a softer way, peer to peer.
They can certainly make people change behavior and even change laws.
Think about how norms around marriage equality today are evolving.
The fifth form of power is ideas.
An idea, individual liberties, say, or racial equality, can generate boundless amounts of power if it motivates enough people to change their thinking and actions.
And so the sixth source of power is numbers, lots of humans.
A vocal mass of people creates power by expressing collective intensity of interest and by asserting legitimacy.
Think of the Arab Spring or the rise of the Tea Party.
Crowds count.
These are the six main sources of power, what power is.
So now, let's think about how power operates.
There are three laws of power worth examining.
Law number one: power is never static.
It's always either accumulating or decaying in a civic arena.
So if you aren't taking action, you're being acted upon.
Law number two: power is like water.
It flows like a current through everyday life.
Politics is the work of harnessing that flow in a direction you prefer.
Policymaking is an effort to freeze and perpetuate a particular flow of power.
Policy is power frozen.
Law number three: power compounds.
Power begets more power, and so does powerlessness.
The only thing that keeps law number three from leading to a situation where only one person has all the power is how we apply laws one and two.
What rules do we set up so that a few people don't accumulate too much power, and so that they can't enshrine their privilege in policy?
That's the question of democracy, and you can see each of these laws at work in any news story.
Low wage workers organize to get higher pay.
Oil companies push to get a big pipeline approved.
Gay and lesbian couples seek the legal right to marry.
Urban parents demand school vouchers.
You may support these efforts or not.
Whether you get what you want depends on how adept you are with power, which brings us finally to what you can do to become more powerful in public life.
Here, it's useful to think in terms of literacy.
Your challenge is to learn how to read power and write power.
To read power means to pay attention to as many texts of power as you can.
I don't mean books only.
I mean seeing society as a set of texts.
Don't like how things are in your campus or city or country?
Map out who has what kind of power, arrayed in what systems.
Understand why it turned out this way, who's made it so, and who wants to keep it so.
Study the strategies others in such situations used: frontal attack or indirection, coalitions or charismatic authority.
Read so you may write.
To write power requires first that you believe you have the right to write, to be an author of change.
You do.
As with any kind of writing, you learn to express yourself, speak up in a voice that's authentic.
Organize your ideas, then organize other people.
Practice consensus building.
Practice conflict.
As with writing, it's all about practice.
Every day you have a chance to practice, in your neighborhood and beyond.
Set objectives, then bigger ones.
Watch the patterns, see what works.
Adapt, repeat.
This is citizenship.
In this short lesson, we've explored where civic power comes from, how it works and what you can do to exercise it.
One big question remaining is the "why" of power.
Do you want power to benefit everyone or only you?
Are your purposes pro-social or anti-social?
This question isn't about strategy.
It's about character, and that's another set of lessons.
But remember this: Power plus character equals a great citizen, and you have the power to be one.
I am an immigrant from Uganda living in the United States while waiting for my asylum application to go through.
Migrants do not enjoy much freedom of movement in our world today.
This certainly applies to those who are desperate enough to navigate choppy and stormy seas in boats.
These are the risks my cousins from West Africa and North Africa face while trying to cross over to Europe.
Indeed, it is a rare but fortunate opportunity for a migrant to address a gathering like this.
But this also signifies what often is missing in the global debate over refugees, migrants and immigrants, voices of the disenfranchised.
Citizens of many host countries, even those that previously welcomed newcomers, are uneasy about the rising numbers of individuals coming into their countries.
The immediate criticism is that the newcomers upend the stability of social welfare and employment in their countries.
Uncertain and skeptical citizens look towards politicians who are competing against each other to see who can claim the prize of the loudest voice of populism and nationalism.
It is a contest of who is the toughest on migrants, the most willing to impose travel bans and the most eager to propose projects in building walls.
All these restrictions simply address symptoms of the problem, not the causes.
Why are they coming?
Migrants can share perspectives, if only politicians would be willing to listen.
In Dubai, I chronicled injustices and inequalities inflicted regularly on the migrant labor force.
As a result, pressures from the governments of the respective countries led to me being forced out of my career as a journalist in the Middle East.
I was deported to Uganda, where economic deprivation puts everyone at the risk of starvation.
I fled Uganda to come to the United States in the hope of sustaining a voice for my brothers and sisters who experience a more serious plight as migrants.
My father told me he was not happy about me writing a book that risked deportation and unemployment.
He had been diabetic for many years when I still worked in Dubai, and my salary was always sufficient to pay for his treatments.
After I was expelled, I could not afford to sustain his treatment, and even in the last days of his life, I could not afford to take him to a hospital.
As I carried his body in my hands to lay it in the ground in June of last year, I realized I had paid a profound price for amplifying my voice.
The act of speaking up against injustices that are multilayered is never easy, because the problems require more than just rhetoric.
So long as gold mines, oilfields and large farms in Africa continue to be owned by foreign investors and those vital resources are shipped to the West, the stream of African migrants will flow continuously.
There are no restrictions that could ever be so rigorous to stop the wave of migration that has determined our human history.
Before border controls can be tightened and new visa restrictions imposed, countries that have long received migrants should engage in a more open discussion.
That is the only practical start for reconciling, finally, a legacy of exploitation, slavery, colonialism and imperialism, so that together, we can move forward in creating a more just global economy in the 21st century -- one that benefits all.
Well we all know the World Wide Web has absolutely transformed publishing, broadcasting, commerce and social connectivity, but where did it all come from?
And I'll quote three people: Vannevar Bush, Doug Engelbart and Tim Berners-Lee.
So let's just run through these guys.
This is Vannevar Bush.
Vannevar Bush was the U.S. government's chief scientific adviser during the war.
And in 1945, he published an article in a magazine called Atlantic Monthly.
And the article was called "As We May Think."
And what Vannevar Bush was saying was the way we use information is broken.
We don't work in terms of libraries and catalog systems and so forth.
The brain works by association.
With one item in its thought, it snaps instantly to the next item.
And the way information is structured is totally incapable of keeping up with this process.
And so he suggested a machine, and he called it the memex.
And the memex would link information, one piece of information to a related piece of information and so forth.
Now this was in 1945.
A computer in those days was something the secret services used to use for code breaking.
And nobody knew anything about it.
So this was before the computer was invented.
And he proposed this machine called the memex.
And he had a platform where you linked information to other information, and then you could call it up at will.
So spinning forward, one of the guys who read this article was a guy called Doug Engelbart, and he was a U.S. Air Force officer.
And he was reading it in their library in the Far East.
And he was so inspired by this article, it kind of directed the rest of his life.
And by the mid-60s, he was able to put this into action when he worked at the Stanford Research Lab in California.
He built a system.
The system was designed to augment human intelligence, it was called.
And in a premonition of today's world of cloud computing and softwares of service, his system was called NLS for oN-Line System.
And this is Doug Engelbart.
He was giving a presentation at the Fall Joint Computer Conference in 1968.
What he showed -- he sat on a stage like this, and he demonstrated this system.
He had his head mic like I've got.
And he works this system.
And you can see, he's working between documents and graphics and so forth.
And he's driving it all with this platform here, with a five-finger keyboard and the world's first computer mouse, which he specially designed in order to do this system.
So this is where the mouse came from as well.
So this is Doug Engelbart.
The trouble with Doug Engelbart's system was that the computers in those days cost several million pounds.
So for a personal computer, a few million pounds was like having a personal jet plane; it wasn't really very practical.
But spin on to the 80s when personal computers did arrive, then there was room for this kind of system on personal computers.
And my company, OWL built a system called Guide for the Apple Macintosh.
And we delivered the world's first hypertext system.
And this began to get a head of steam.
Apple introduced a thing called HyperCard, and they made a bit of a fuss about it.
They had a 12-page supplement in the Wall Street Journal the day it launched.
The magazines started to cover it.
Byte magazine and Communications at the ACM had special issues covering hypertext.
We developed a PC version of this product as well as the Macintosh version.
And our PC version became quite mature.
These are some examples of this system in action in the late 80s.
You were able to deliver documents, were able to do it over networks.
We developed a system such that it had a markup language based on html.
We called it hml: hypertext markup language.
And the system was capable of doing very, very large documentation systems over computer networks.
So I took this system to a trade show in Versailles near Paris in late November 1990.
And I was approached by a nice young man called Tim Berners-Lee who said, "Are you Ian Ritchie?" and I said, "Yeah."
And he said, "I need to talk to you."
And he told me about his proposed system called the World Wide Web.
And I thought, well, that's got a pretentious name, especially since the whole system ran on his computer in his office.
But he was completely convinced that his World Wide Web would take over the world one day.
And he tried to persuade me to write the browser for it, because his system didn't have any graphics or fonts or layout or anything; it was just plain text.
I thought, well, you know, interesting, but a guy from CERN, he's not going to do this.
So we didn't do it.
In the next couple of years, the hypertext community didn't recognize him either.
In 1992, his paper was rejected for the Hypertext Conference.
In 1993, there was a table at the conference in Seattle, and a guy called Marc Andreessen was demonstrating his little browser for the World Wide Web.
And I saw it, and I thought, yep, that's it.
And the very next year, in 1994, we had the conference here in Edinburgh, and I had no opposition in having Tim Berners-Lee as the keynote speaker.

