The other word, peripeteia, that's the moment in the great tragedies -- Euripides and Sophocles.
That's the moment where Oedipus has his moment, where he suddenly realizes that hot chick he's been sleeping with and having babies with is his mother.
That's peripety, or peripeteia.
And this metaphor in my head -- I've got anagnorisis and peripeteia on my chin -- (Laughter) I've got to tell you, it's such a great device, though.
When you start to look for peripeteia, you find it everywhere.
I mean, Bruce Willis in "The Sixth Sense," right?
Spends the whole movie trying to help the little kid who sees dead people, and then -- boom! -- "Oh, I'm dead."
Peripeteia.
You know?
It's crushing when the audience sees it the right way.
Neo in "The Matrix," you know?
"Oh, I'm living in a computer program.
That's weird."
These discoveries that lead to sudden realizations.
And I've been having them, over 200 dirty jobs, I have them all the time, but that one -- that one drilled something home in a way that I just wasn't prepared for.
And, as I stood there, looking at the happy lamb that I had just defiled -- but it looked OK; looking at that poor other little thing that I'd done it the right way on, and I just was struck by -- if I'm wrong about that, and if I'm wrong so often, in a literal way, what other peripatetic misconceptions might I be able to comment upon?
Because, look -- I'm not a social anthropologist, but I have a friend who is.
And I talk to him.
(Laughter) And he says, "Hey Mike, look.
I don't know if your brain is interested in this sort of thing or not, but do you realize you've shot in every state?
You've worked in mining, you've worked in fishing, you've worked in steel, you've worked in every major industry.
You've had your back shoulder to shoulder with these guys that our politicians are desperate to relate to every four years, right?"
I can still see Hillary doing the shots of rye, dribbling down her chin, with the steel workers.
I mean, these are the people that I work with every single day.
"And if you have something to say about their thoughts, collectively, it might be time to think about it.
Because, dude, you know, four years."
So, that's in my head, testicles are on my chin, thoughts are bouncing around.
And, after that shoot, "Dirty Jobs" really didn't change, in terms of what the show is, but it changed for me, personally.
And now, when I talk about the show, I no longer just tell the story you heard and 190 like it.
I do, but I also start to talk about some of the other things I got wrong; some of the other notions of work that I've just been assuming are sacrosanct, and they're not.
People with dirty jobs are happier than you think.
As a group, they're the happiest people I know.
And I don't want to start whistling "Look for the Union Label," and all that happy-worker crap.
I'm just telling you that these are balanced people who do unthinkable work.
Roadkill picker-uppers whistle while they work, I swear to God -- I did it with them.
They've got this amazing sort of symmetry to their life.
And I see it over and over and over again.
So I started to wonder what would happen if we challenged some of these sacred cows?
Follow your passion -- we've been talking about it here for the last 36 hours.
Follow your passion -- what could possibly be wrong with that?
It's probably the worst advice I ever got.
(Laughter) Follow your dreams and go broke, right?
I mean, that's all I heard growing up.
I didn't know what to do with my life, but I was told if you follow your passion, it's going to work out.
I can give you 30 examples right now.
Bob Combs, the pig farmer in Las Vegas who collects the uneaten scraps of food from the casinos and feeds them to his swine.
Why?
Because there's so much protein in the stuff we don't eat, his pigs grow at twice the normal speed, and he's one rich pig farmer.
He's good for the environment, he spends his days doing this incredible service, and he smells like hell, but God bless him.
He's making a great living.
You ask him, "Did you follow your passion here?"
and he'd laugh at you.
The guy's worth -- he just got offered like 60 million dollars for his farm and turned it down, outside of Vegas.
He didn't follow his passion.
He stepped back and he watched where everybody was going, and he went the other way.
And I hear that story over and over.
Matt Freund, a dairy farmer in New Canaan, Connecticut, who woke up one day and realized the crap from his cows was worth more than their milk, if he could use it to make these biodegradable flowerpots.
Now he's selling them to Walmart, right?
Follow his passion?
The guy's -- come on.
So I started to look at passion, I started to look at efficiency vs. effectiveness.
As Tim talked about earlier, that's a huge distinction.
I started to look at teamwork and determination.
And basically, all those platitudes they call "successories" that hang with that schmaltzy art in boardrooms around the world right now, that stuff -- it's suddenly all been turned on its head.
Safety.
Safety first is ...
Going back to OSHA and PETA and the Humane Society: What if OSHA got it wrong?
I mean -- this is heresy, what I'm about to say -- but what if it's really safety third?
Right?
(Laughter) No, I mean, really.
What I mean to say is: I value my safety on these crazy jobs as much as the people that I'm working with, but the ones who really get it done -- they're not out there talking about safety first.
They know that other things come first -- the business of doing the work comes first, the business of getting it done.
And I'll never forget, up in the Bering Sea, I was on a crab boat with the "Deadliest Catch" guys -- which I also work on in the first season.
We were about 100 miles off the coast of Russia: 50-foot seas, big waves, green water coming over the wheelhouse, right?
Most hazardous environment I'd ever seen, and I was back with a guy, lashing the pots down.
So I'm 40 feet off the deck, which is like looking down at the top of your shoe, you know, and it's doing this in the ocean.
Unspeakably dangerous.
I scamper down, I go into the wheelhouse and I say, with some level of incredulity, "Captain -- OSHA?"
And he says, "OSHA?
Ocean."
And he points out there.
(Laughter) But in that moment, what he said next can't be repeated in the Lower 48.
It can't be repeated on any factory floor or any construction site.
But he looked at me and said, "Son," -- he's my age, by the way, he calls me "son," I love that -- he says, "Son, I'm the captain of a crab boat.
My responsibility is not to get you home alive.
My responsibility is to get you home rich."
(Laughter) You want to get home alive, that's on you."
And for the rest of that day -- safety first.
I mean, I was like -- So, the idea that we create this sense of complacency when all we do is talk about somebody else's responsibility as though it's our own, and vice versa.
Anyhow, a whole lot of things.
I could talk at length about the many little distinctions we made and the endless list of ways that I got it wrong.
But what it all comes down to is this: I've formed a theory, and I'm going to share it now in my remaining 2 minutes and 30 seconds.
It goes like this: we've declared war on work, as a society -- all of us.
It's a civil war.
It's a cold war, really.
We didn't set out to do it and we didn't twist our mustache in some Machiavellian way, but we've done it.
And we've waged this war on at least four fronts, certainly in Hollywood.
The way we portray working people on TV -- it's laughable.
If there's a plumber, he's 300 pounds and he's got a giant butt crack, admit it.
You see him all the time.
That's what plumbers look like, right?
We turn them into heroes, or we turn them into punch lines.
That's what TV does.
We try hard on "Dirty Jobs" not to do that, which is why I do the work and I don't cheat.
But, we've waged this war on Madison Avenue.
So many of the commercials that come out there in the way of a message -- what's really being said?
"Your life would be better if you could work a little less, didn't have to work so hard, got home a little earlier, could retire a little faster, punch out a little sooner."
It's all in there, over and over, again and again.
Washington?
I can't even begin to talk about the deals and policies in place that affect the bottom-line reality of the available jobs, because I don't really know; I just know that that's a front in this war.
And right here, guys -- Silicon Valley.
I mean -- how many people have an iPhone on them right now?
How many people have their BlackBerry?
We're plugged in; we're connected.
I would never suggest for a second that something bad has come out of the tech revolution.
Good grief, not to this crowd.
(Laughter) But I would suggest that innovation without imitation is a complete waste of time.
And nobody celebrates imitation the way "Dirty Jobs" guys know it has to be done.
Your iPhone without those people making the same interface, the same circuitry, the same board, over and over -- all of that -- that's what makes it equally as possible as the genius that goes inside of it.
So, we've got this new toolbox.
You know?
Our tools today don't look like shovels and picks.
They look like the stuff we walk around with.
And so the collective effect of all of that has been this marginalization of lots and lots of jobs.
And I realized, probably too late in this game -- I hope not, because I don't know if I can do 200 more of these things -- but we're going to do as many as we can.
And to me, the most important thing to know and to really come face to face with, is that fact that I got it wrong about a lot of things, not just the testicles on my chin.
I got a lot wrong.
So, we're thinking -- by "we," I mean me -- (Laughter) that the thing to do is to talk about a PR campaign for work -- manual labor, skilled labor.
Somebody needs to be out there, talking about the forgotten benefits.
I'm talking about grandfather stuff, the stuff a lot us probably grew up with but we've kind of -- you know, kind of lost a little.
Barack wants to create two and a half million jobs.
The infrastructure is a huge deal.
This war on work that I suppose exists, has casualties like any other war.
The infrastructure is the first one, declining trade school enrollments are the second one.
Every single year, fewer electricians, fewer carpenters, fewer plumbers, fewer welders, fewer pipe fitters, fewer steam fitters.
The infrastructure jobs that everybody is talking about creating are those guys -- the ones that have been in decline, over and over.
Meanwhile, we've got two trillion dollars, at a minimum, according to the American Society of Civil Engineers, that we need to expend to even make a dent in the infrastructure, which is currently rated at a D minus.
So, if I were running for anything -- and I'm not -- I would simply say that the jobs we hope to make and the jobs we hope to create aren't going to stick unless they're jobs that people want.
And I know the point of this conference is to celebrate things that are near and dear to us, but I also know that clean and dirty aren't opposites.
They're two sides of the same coin, just like innovation and imitation, like risk and responsibility, like peripeteia and anagnorisis, like that poor little lamb, who I hope isn't quivering anymore, and like my time that's gone.
It's been great talking to you.
And get back to work, will you?
(Applause)
This is Revolution 2.0.
No one was a hero.
No one was a hero.
Because everyone was a hero.
Everyone has done something.
We all use Wikipedia.
If you think of the concept of Wikipedia where everyone is collaborating on content, and at the end of the day you've built the largest encyclopedia in the world.
From just an idea that sounded crazy, you have the largest encyclopedia in the world.
And in the Egyptian revolution, the Revolution 2.0, everyone has contributed something, small or big.
They contributed something -- to bring us one of the most inspiring stories in the history of mankind when it comes to revolutions.
It was actually really inspiring to see all these Egyptians completely changing.
If you look at the scene, Egypt, for 30 years, had been in a downhill -- going into a downhill.
Everything was going bad.
Everything was going wrong.
We only ranked high when it comes to poverty, corruption, lack of freedom of speech, lack of political activism.
Those were the achievements of our great regime.
Yet, nothing was happening.
And it's not because people were happy or people were not frustrated.
In fact, people were extremely frustrated.
But the reason why everyone was silent is what I call the psychological barrier of fear.
Everyone was scared.
Not everyone.
There were actually a few brave Egyptians that I have to thank for being so brave -- going into protests as a couple of hundred, getting beaten up and arrested.
But in fact, the majority were scared.
Everyone did not want really to get in trouble.
A dictator cannot live without the force.
They want to make people live in fear.
And that psychological barrier of fear had worked for so many years, and here comes the Internet, technology, BlackBerry, SMS.
It's helping all of us to connect.
Platforms like YouTube, Twitter, Facebook were helping us a lot because it basically gave us the impression that, "Wow, I'm not alone.
There are a lot of people who are frustrated."
There are lots of people who are frustrated.
There are lots of people who actually share the same dream.
There are lots of people who care about their freedom.
They probably have the best life in the world.
They are living in happiness.
They are living in their villas.
They are happy.
They don't have problems.
But they are still feeling the pain of the Egyptian.
A lot of us, we're not really happy when we see a video of an Egyptian man who's eating the trash while others are stealing billions of Egyptian pounds from the wealth of the country.
The Internet has played a great role, helping these people to speak up their minds, to collaborate together, to start thinking together.
It was an educational campaign.
Khaled Saeed was killed in June 2010.
I still remember the photo.
I still remember every single detail of that photo.
The photo was horrible.
He was tortured, brutally tortured to death.
But then what was the answer of the regime?
"He choked on a pile of hash" -- that was their answer: "He's a criminal.
He's someone who escaped from all these bad things."
But people did not relate to this.
People did not believe this.
Because of the Internet, the truth prevailed and everyone knew the truth.
And everyone started to think that "this guy could be my brother."
He was a middle-class guy.
His photo was remembered by all of us.
A page was created.
An anonymous administrator was basically inviting people to join the page, and there was no plan.
"What are we going to do?"
"I don't know."
In a few days, tens of thousands of people there -- angry Egyptians who were asking the ministry of interior affairs, "Enough.
Get those who killed this guy.
To just bring them to justice."
But of course, they don't listen.
It was an amazing story -- how everyone started feeling the ownership.
Everyone was an owner in this page.
People started contributing ideas.
In fact, one of the most ridiculous ideas was, "Hey, let's have a silent stand.
Let's get people to go in the street, face the sea, their back to the street, dressed in black, standing up silently for one hour, doing nothing and then just leaving, going back home."
For some people, that was like, "Wow, silent stand.
And next time it's going to be vibration."
People were making fun of the idea.
But actually when people went to the street -- the first time it was thousands of people in Alexandria -- it felt like -- it was amazing.
It was great because it connected people from the virtual world, bringing them to the real world, sharing the same dream, the same frustration, the same anger, the same desire for freedom.
And they were doing this thing.
But did the regime learn anything?
Not really.
They were actually attacking them.
They were actually abusing them, despite the fact of how peaceful these guys were -- they were not even protesting.
And things had developed until the Tunisian revolution.
This whole page was, again, managed by the people.
In fact, the anonymous admin job was to collect ideas, help people to vote on them and actually tell them what they are doing.
People were taking shots and photos; people were reporting violations of human rights in Egypt; people were suggesting ideas, they were actually voting on ideas, and then they were executing the ideas; people were creating videos.
Everything was done by the people to the people, and that's the power of the Internet.
There was no leader.
The leader was everyone on that page.
The Tunisian experiment, as Amir was saying, inspired all of us, showed us that there is a way.
Yes we can.
We can do it.
We have the same problems; we can just go in the streets.
And when I saw the street on the 25th, I went back and said, "Egypt before the 25th is never going to be Egypt after the 25th.
The revolution is happening.
This is not the end, this is the beginning of the end."
I was detained on the 27th night.
Thank God I announced the locations and everything.
But they detained me.
And I'm not going to talk about my experience, because this is not about me.
I was detained for 12 days, blindfolded, handcuffed.
And I did not really hear anything.
I did not know anything.
I was not allowed to speak with anyone.
And I went out.
The next day I was in Tahrir.
Seriously, with the amount of change I had noticed in this square, I thought it was 12 years.
I never had in my mind to see this Egyptian, the amazing Egyptian.
The fear is no longer fear.
It's actually strength -- it's power.
People were so empowered.
It was amazing how everyone was so empowered and now asking for their rights.
Completely opposite.
Extremism became tolerance.
Who would imagined before the 25th, if I tell you that hundreds of thousands of Christians are going to pray and tens of thousands of Muslims are going to protect them, and then hundreds of thousands of Muslims are going to pray and tens of thousands of Christians are going to protect them -- this is amazing.
All the stereotypes that the regime was trying to put on us through their so-called propaganda, or mainstream media, are proven wrong.
This whole revolution showed us how ugly such a regime was and how great and amazing the Egyptian man, the Egyptian woman, how simple and amazing these people are whenever they have a dream.
When I saw that, I went back and I wrote on Facebook.
And that was a personal belief, regardless of what's going on, regardless of the details.
I said that, "We are going to win.
We are going to win because we don't understand politics.
We're going to win because we don't play their dirty games.
We're going to win because we don't have an agenda.

