And so I got a cop to confirm that Abed still lived somewhere in his same town, and I was now driving to it with a potted yellow rose in the back seat, when suddenly flowers seemed a ridiculous offering.
But what to get the man who broke your fucking neck?
(Laughter) I pulled into the town of Abu Ghosh, and bought a brick of Turkish delight: pistachios glued in rosewater.
Better.
Back on Highway 1, I envisioned what awaited.
Abed would hug me.
Abed would spit at me.
Abed would say, "I'm sorry."
I then began to wonder, as I had many times before, how my life would have been different had this man not injured me, had my genes been fed a different helping of experience.
Who was I?
Was I who I had been before the crash, before this road divided my life like the spine of an open book?
Was I what had been done to me?
Were all of us the results of things done to us, done for us, the infidelity of a parent or spouse, money inherited?
Were we instead our bodies, their inborn endowments and deficits?
It seemed that we could be nothing more than genes and experience, but how to tease out the one from the other?
As Yeats put that same universal question, "O body swayed to music, o brightening glance, how can we know the dancer from the dance?"
I'd been driving for an hour when I looked in my rearview mirror and saw my own brightening glance.
The light my eyes had carried for as long as they had been blue.
The predispositions and impulses that had propelled me as a toddler to try and slip over a boat into a Chicago lake, that had propelled me as a teen to jump into wild Cape Cod Bay after a hurricane.
But I also saw in my reflection that, had Abed not injured me, I would now, in all likelihood, be a doctor and a husband and a father.
I would be less mindful of time and of death, and, oh, I would not be disabled, would not suffer the thousand slings and arrows of my fortune.
The frequent furl of five fingers, the chips in my teeth come from biting at all the many things a solitary hand cannot open.
The dancer and the dance were hopelessly entwined.
It was approaching 11 when I exited right toward Afula, and passed a large quarry and was soon in Kfar Kara.
I felt a pang of nerves.
But Chopin was on the radio, seven beautiful mazurkas, and I pulled into a lot by a gas station to listen and to calm.
I'd been told that in an Arab town, one need only mention the name of a local and it will be recognized.
And I was mentioning Abed and myself, noting deliberately that I was here in peace, to the people in this town, when I met Mohamed outside a post office at noon.
He listened to me.
You know, it was most often when speaking to people that I wondered where I ended and my disability began, for many people told me what they told no one else.
Many cried.
And one day, after a woman I met on the street did the same and I later asked her why, she told me that, best she could tell, her tears had had something to do with my being happy and strong, but vulnerable too.
I listened to her words.
I suppose they were true.
I was me, but I was now me despite a limp, and that, I suppose, was what now made me, me.
Anyway, Mohamed told me what perhaps he would not have told another stranger.
He led me to a house of cream stucco, then drove off.
And as I sat contemplating what to say, a woman approached in a black shawl and black robe.
I stepped from my car and said "Shalom," and identified myself, and she told me that her husband Abed would be home from work in four hours.
Her Hebrew was not good, and she later confessed that she thought that I had come to install the Internet.
(Laughter) I drove off and returned at 4:30, thankful to the minaret up the road that helped me find my way back.
And as I approached the front door, Abed saw me, my jeans and flannel and cane, and I saw Abed, an average-looking man of average size.
He wore black and white: slippers over socks, pilling sweatpants, a piebald sweater, a striped ski cap pulled down to his forehead.
He'd been expecting me.
Mohamed had phoned.
And so at once, we shook hands, and smiled, and I gave him my gift, and he told me I was a guest in his home, and we sat beside one another on a fabric couch.
It was then that Abed resumed at once the tale of woe he had begun over the phone 16 years before.
He'd just had surgery on his eyes, he said.
He had problems with his side and his legs too, and, oh, he'd lost his teeth in the crash.
Did I wish to see him remove them?
Abed then rose and turned on the TV so that I wouldn't be alone when he left the room, and returned with polaroids of the crash and his old driver's license.
"I was handsome," he said.
We looked down at his laminated mug.
Abed had been less handsome than substantial, with thick black hair and a full face and a wide neck.
It was this youth who on May 16, 1990, had broken two necks including mine, and bruised one brain and taken one life.
Twenty-one years later, he was now thinner than his wife, his skin slack on his face, and looking at Abed looking at his young self, I remembered looking at that photograph of my young self after the crash, and recognized his longing.
"The crash changed both of our lives," I said.
Abed then showed me a picture of his mashed truck, and said that the crash was the fault of a bus driver in the left lane who did not let him pass.
I did not want to recap the crash with Abed.
I'd hoped for something simpler: to exchange a Turkish dessert for two words and be on my way.
And so I didn't point out that in his own testimony the morning after the crash, Abed did not even mention the bus driver.
No, I was quiet.
I was quiet because I had not come for truth.
I had come for remorse.
And so I now went looking for remorse and threw truth under the bus.
"I understand," I said, "that the crash was not your fault, but does it make you sad that others suffered?"
Abed spoke three quick words.
"Yes, I suffered."
Abed then told me why he'd suffered.
He'd lived an unholy life before the crash, and so God had ordained the crash, but now, he said, he was religious, and God was pleased.
It was then that God intervened: news on the TV of a car wreck that hours before had killed three people up north.
We looked up at the wreckage.
"Strange," I said.
"Strange," he agreed.
I had the thought that there, on Route 804, there were perpetrators and victims, dyads bound by a crash.
Some, as had Abed, would forget the date.
Some, as had I, would remember.
The report finished and Abed spoke.
"It is a pity," he said, "that the police in this country are not tough enough on bad drivers."
I was baffled.
Abed had said something remarkable.
Did it point up the degree to which he'd absolved himself of the crash?
Was it evidence of guilt, an assertion that he should have been put away longer?
He'd served six months in prison, lost his truck license for a decade.
I forgot my discretion.
"Um, Abed," I said, "I thought you had a few driving issues before the crash."
"Well," he said, "I once went 60 in a 40."
And so 27 violations -- driving through a red light, driving at excessive speed, driving on the wrong side of a barrier, and finally, riding his brakes down that hill -- reduced to one.
And it was then I understood that no matter how stark the reality, the human being fits it into a narrative that is palatable.
The goat becomes the hero.
The perpetrator becomes the victim.
It was then I understood that Abed would never apologize.
Abed and I sat with our coffee.
We'd spent 90 minutes together, and he was now known to me.
He was not a particularly bad man or a particularly good man.
He was a limited man who'd found it within himself to be kind to me.
With a nod to Jewish custom, he told me that I should live to be 120 years old.
But it was hard for me to relate to one who had so completely washed his hands of his own calamitous doing, to one whose life was so unexamined that he said he thought two people had died in the crash.
There was much I wished to say to Abed.
I wished to tell him that, were he to acknowledge my disability, it would be okay, for people are wrong to marvel at those like me who smile as we limp.
People don't know that they have lived through worse, that problems of the heart hit with a force greater than a runaway truck, that problems of the mind are greater still, more injurious, than a hundred broken necks.
I wished to tell him that what makes most of us who we are most of all is not our minds and not our bodies and not what happens to us, but how we respond to what happens to us.
"This," wrote the psychiatrist Viktor Frankl, "is the last of the human freedoms: to choose one's attitude in any given set of circumstances."
I wished to tell him that not only paralyzers and paralyzees must evolve, reconcile to reality, but we all must -- the aging and the anxious and the divorced and the balding and the bankrupt and everyone.
I wished to tell him that one does not have to say that a bad thing is good, that a crash is from God and so a crash is good, a broken neck is good.
One can say that a bad thing sucks, but that this natural world still has many glories.
I wished to tell him that, in the end, our mandate is clear: We have to rise above bad fortune.
We have to be in the good and enjoy the good, study and work and adventure and friendship -- oh, friendship -- and community and love.
But most of all, I wished to tell him what Herman Melville wrote, that "truly to enjoy bodily warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this world that is not what it is merely by contrast."
Yes, contrast.
If you are mindful of what you do not have, you may be truly mindful of what you do have, and if the gods are kind, you may truly enjoy what you have.
That is the one singular gift you may receive if you suffer in any existential way.
You know death, and so may wake each morning pulsing with ready life.
Some part of you is cold, and so another part may truly enjoy what it is to be warm, or even to be cold.
When one morning, years after the crash, I stepped onto stone and the underside of my left foot felt the flash of cold, nerves at last awake, it was exhilarating, a gust of snow.
But I didn't say these things to Abed.
I told him only that he had killed one man, not two.
I told him the name of that man.
And then I said, "Goodbye."
Thank you.
(Applause) Thanks a lot.
(Applause)
Alisa Volkman: So this is where our story begins -- the dramatic moments of the birth of our first son, Declan.
Obviously a really profound moment, and it changed our lives in many ways.
It also changed our lives in many unexpected ways, and those unexpected ways we later reflected on, that eventually spawned a business idea between the two of us, and a year later, we launched Babble, a website for parents.
Rufus Griscom: Now I think of our story as starting a few years earlier.
AV: That's true.
RG: You may remember, we fell head over heels in love.
AV: We did.
RG: We were at the time running a very different kind of website.
It was a website called Nerve.com, the tagline of which was "literate smut."
It was in theory, and hopefully in practice, a smart online magazine about sex and culture.
AV: That spawned a dating site.
But you can understand the jokes that we get.
Sex begets babies.
You follow instructions on Nerve and you should end up on Babble, which we did.
And we might launch a geriatric site as our third.
We'll see.
RG: But for us, the continuity between Nerve and Babble was not just the life stage thing, which is, of course, relevant, but it was really more about our desire to speak very honestly about subjects that people have difficulty speaking honestly about.
It seems to us that when people start dissembling, people start lying about things, that's when it gets really interesting.
That's a subject that we want to dive into.
And we've been surprised to find, as young parents, that there are almost more taboos around parenting than there are around sex.
AV: It's true.
So like we said, the early years were really wonderful, but they were also really difficult.
And we feel like some of that difficulty was because of this false advertisement around parenting.
(Laughter) We subscribed to a lot of magazines, did our homework, but really everywhere you look around, we were surrounded by images like this.
And we went into parenting expecting our lives to look like this.
The sun was always streaming in, and our children would never be crying.
I would always be perfectly coiffed and well rested, and in fact, it was not like that at all.
RG: When we lowered the glossy parenting magazine that we were looking at, with these beautiful images, and looked at the scene in our actual living room, it looked a little bit more like this.
These are our three sons.
And of course, they're not always crying and screaming, but with three boys, there's a decent probability that at least one of them will not be comporting himself exactly as he should.
AV: Yes, you can see where the disconnect was happening for us.
We really felt like what we went in expecting had nothing to do with what we were actually experiencing, and so we decided we really wanted to give it to parents straight.
We really wanted to let them understand what the realities of parenting were in an honest way.
RG: So today, what we would love to do is share with you four parenting taboos.
And of course, there are many more than four things you can't say about parenting, but we would like to share with you today four that are particularly relevant for us personally.
So the first, taboo number one: you can't say you didn't fall in love with your baby in the very first minute.
I remember vividly, sitting there in the hospital.
We were in the process of giving birth to our first child.
AV: We, or I?
RG: I'm sorry.
Misuse of the pronoun.
Alisa was very generously in the process of giving birth to our first child -- (AV: Thank you.) -- and I was there with a catcher's mitt.
And I was there with my arms open.
The nurse was coming at me with this beautiful, beautiful child, and I remember, as she was approaching me, the voices of friends saying, "The moment they put the baby in your hands, you will feel a sense of love that will come over you that is an order of magnitude more powerful than anything you've ever experienced in your entire life."
So I was bracing myself for the moment.
The baby was coming, and I was ready for this Mack truck of love to just knock me off my feet.
And instead, when the baby was placed in my hands, it was an extraordinary moment.
This picture is from literally a few seconds after the baby was placed in my hands and I brought him over.
And you can see, our eyes were glistening.
I was overwhelmed with love and affection for my wife, with deep, deep gratitude that we had what appeared to be a healthy child.
And it was also, of course, surreal.
I mean, I had to check the tags and make sure.
I was incredulous, "Are you sure this is our child?"
And this was all quite remarkable.
But what I felt towards the child at that moment was deep affection, but nothing like what I feel for him now, five years later.
And so we've done something here that is heretical.
We have charted our love for our child over time.
(Laughter) This, as you know, is an act of heresy.
You're not allowed to chart love.
The reason you're not allowed to chart love is because we think of love as a binary thing.
You're either in love, or you're not in love.
You love, or you don't love.
And I think the reality is that love is a process, and I think the problem with thinking of love as something that's binary is that it causes us to be unduly concerned that love is fraudulent, or inadequate, or what have you.
And I think I'm speaking obviously here to the father's experience.
But I think a lot of men do go through this sense in the early months, maybe their first year, that their emotional response is inadequate in some fashion.
AV: Well, I'm glad Rufus is bringing this up, because you can notice where he dips in the first years where I think I was doing most of the work.
But we like to joke, in the first few months of all of our children's lives, this is Uncle Rufus.
(Laughter) RG: I'm a very affectionate uncle, very affectionate uncle.
AV: Yes, and I often joke with Rufus when he comes home that I'm not sure he would actually be able to find our child in a line-up amongst other babies.
So I actually threw a pop quiz here onto Rufus.
RG: Uh oh.
AV: I don't want to embarrass him too much.
But I am going to give him three seconds.
RG: That is not fair.
This is a trick question.
He's not up there, is he?
AV: Our eight-week-old son is somewhere in here, and I want to see if Rufus can actually quickly identify him.
RG: The far left.
AV: No!
(Laughter) RG: Cruel.
AV: Nothing more to be said.
(Laughter) I'll move on to taboo number two.
You can't talk about how lonely having a baby can be.
I enjoyed being pregnant.
I loved it.
I felt incredibly connected to the community around me.
I felt like everyone was participating in my pregnancy, all around me, tracking it down till the actual due-date.
I felt like I was a vessel of the future of humanity.
That continued into the the hospital.
It was really exhilarating.
I was shower with gifts and flowers and visitors.
It was a really wonderful experience, but when I got home, I suddenly felt very disconnected and suddenly shut in and shut out, and I was really surprised by those feelings.
I did expect it to be difficult, have sleepless nights, constant feedings, but I did not expect the feelings of isolation and loneliness that I experienced, and I was really surprised that no one had talked to me, that I was going to be feeling this way.
And I called my sister whom I'm very close to -- and had three children -- and I asked her, "Why didn't you tell me I was going to be feeling this way, that I was going to have these -- feeling incredibly isolated?"
And she said -- I'll never forget -- "It's just not something you want to say to a mother that's having a baby for the first time."
RG: And of course, we think it's precisely what you really should be saying to mothers who have kids for the first time.

