And that this, of course, one of the themes for us is that we think that candor and brutal honesty is critical to us collectively being great parents.
And it's hard not to think that part of what leads to this sense of isolation is our modern world.
So Alisa's experience is not isolated.
So your 58 percent of mothers surveyed report feelings of loneliness.
Of those, 67 percent are most lonely when their kids are zero to five -- probably really zero to two.
In the process of preparing this, we looked at how some other cultures around the world deal with this period of time, because here in the Western world, less than 50 percent of us live near our family members, which I think is part of why this is such a tough period.
So to take one example among many: in Southern India there's a practice known as jholabhari, in which the pregnant woman, when she's seven or eight months pregnant, moves in with her mother and goes through a series of rituals and ceremonies, give birth and returns home to her nuclear family several months after the child is born.
And this is one of many ways that we think other cultures offset this kind of lonely period.
AV: So taboo number three: you can't talk about your miscarriage -- but today I'll talk about mine.
So after we had Declan, we kind of recalibrated our expectations.
We thought we actually could go through this again and thought we knew what we would be up against.
And we were grateful that I was able to get pregnant, and I soon learned that we were having a boy, and then when I was five months, we learned that we had lost our child.
This is actually the last little image we have of him.
And it was obviously a very difficult time -- really painful.
As I was working through that mourning process, I was amazed that I didn't want to see anybody.
I really wanted to crawl into a hole, and I didn't really know how I was going to work my way back into my surrounding community.
And I realize, I think, the way I was feeling that way, is on a really deep gut level, I was feeling a lot of shame and embarrassed, frankly, that, in some respects, I had failed at delivering what I'm genetically engineered to do.
And of course, it made me question, if I wasn't able to have another child, what would that mean for my marriage, and just me as a woman.
So it was a very difficult time.
As I started working through it more, I started climbing out of that hole and talking with other people.
I was really amazed by all the stories that started flooding in.
People I interacted with daily, worked with, was friends with, family members that I had known a long time, had never shared with me their own stories.
And I just remember feeling all these stories came out of the woodwork, and I felt like I happened upon this secret society of women that I now was a part of, which was reassuring and also really concerning.
And I think, miscarriage is an invisible loss.
There's not really a lot of community support around it.
There's really no ceremony, rituals, or rites.
And I think, with a death, you have a funeral, you celebrate the life, and there's a lot of community support, and it's something women don't have with miscarriage.
RG: Which is too bad because, of course, it's a very common and very traumatic experience.
Fifteen to 20 percent of all pregnancies result in miscarriage, and I find this astounding.
In a survey, 74 percent of women said that miscarriage, they felt, was partly their fault, which is awful.
And astoundingly, 22 percent said they would hide a miscarriage from their spouse.
So taboo number four: you can't say that your average happiness has declined since having a child.
The party line is that every single aspect of my life has just gotten dramatically better ever since I participated in the miracle that is childbirth and family.
I'll never forget, I remember vividly to this day, our first son, Declan, was nine months old, and I was sitting there on the couch, and I was reading Daniel Gilbert's wonderful book, "Stumbling on Happiness."
And I got about two-thirds of the way through, and there was a chart on the right-hand side -- on the right-hand page -- that we've labeled here "The Most Terrifying Chart Imaginable for a New Parent."
This chart is comprised of four completely independent studies.
Basically, there's this precipitous drop of marital satisfaction, which is closely aligned, we all know, with broader happiness, that doesn't rise again until your first child goes to college.
So I'm sitting here looking at the next two decades of my life, this chasm of happiness that we're driving our proverbial convertible straight into.
We were despondent.
AV: So you can imagine, I mean again, the first few months were difficult, but we'd come out of it, and were really shocked to see this study.
So we really wanted to take a deeper look at it in hopes that we would find a silver lining.
RG: And that's when it's great to be running a website for parents, because we got this incredible reporter to go and interview all the scientists who conducted these four studies.
We said, something is wrong here.
There's something missing from these studies.
It can't possibly be that bad.
So Liz Mitchell did a wonderful job with this piece, and she interviewed four scientists, and she also interviewed Daniel Gilbert, and we did indeed find a silver lining.
So this is our guess as to what this baseline of average happiness arguably looks like throughout life.
Average happiness is, of course, inadequate, because it doesn't speak to the moment-by-moment experience, and so this is what we think it looks like when you layer in moment-to-moment experience.
And so we all remember as children, the tiniest little thing -- and we see it on the faces of our children -- the teeniest little thing can just rocket them to these heights of just utter adulation, and then the next teeniest little thing can cause them just to plummet to the depths of despair.
And it's just extraordinary to watch, and we remember it ourselves.
And then, of course, as you get older, it's almost like age is a form of lithium.
As you get older, you become more stable.
And part of what happens, I think, in your '20s and '30s, is you start to learn to hedge your happiness.
You start to realize that "Hey, I could go to this live music event and have an utterly transforming experience that will cover my entire body with goosebumps, but it's more likely that I'll feel claustrophobic and I won't be able to get a beer.
So I'm not going to go.
I've got a good stereo at home.
So, I'm not going to go."
So your average happiness goes up, but you lose those transcendent moments.
AV: Yeah, and then you have your first child, and then you really resubmit yourself to these highs and lows -- the highs being the first steps, the first smile, your child reading to you for the first time -- the lows being, our house, any time from six to seven every night.
But you realize you resubmit yourself to losing control in a really wonderful way, which we think provides a lot of meaning to our lives and is quite gratifying.
RG: And so in effect, we trade average happiness.
We trade the sort of security and safety of a certain level of contentment for these transcendent moments.
So where does that leave the two of us as a family with our three little boys in the thick of all this?
There's another factor in our case.
We have violated yet another taboo in our own lives, and this is a bonus taboo.
AV: A quick bonus taboo for you, that we should not be working together, especially with three children -- and we are.
RG: And we had reservations about this on the front end.
Everybody knows, you should absolutely not work with your spouse.
In fact, when we first went out to raise money to start Babble, the venture capitalists said, "We categorically don't invest in companies founded by husbands and wives, because there's an extra point of failure.
It's a bad idea.
Don't do it."
And we obviously went forward.
We did.
We raised the money, and we're thrilled that we did, because in this phase of one's life, the incredibly scarce resource is time.
And if you're really passionate about what you do every day -- which we are -- and you're also passionate about your relationship, this is the only way we know how to do it.
And so the final question that we would ask is: can we collectively bend that happiness chart upwards?
It's great that we have these transcendent moments of joy, but they're sometimes pretty quick.
And so how about that average baseline of happiness?
Can we move that up a little bit?
AV: And we kind of feel that the happiness gap, which we talked about, is really the result of walking into parenting -- and really any long-term partnership for that matter -- with the wrong expectations.
And if you have the right expectations and expectation management, we feel like it's going to be a pretty gratifying experience.
RG: And so this is what -- And we think that a lot of parents, when you get in there -- in our case anyway -- you pack your bags for a trip to Europe, and you're really excited to go.
Get out of the airplane, it turns out you're trekking in Nepal.
And trekking in Nepal is an extraordinary experience, particularly if you pack your bags properly and you know what you're getting in for and you're psyched.
So the point of all this for us today is not just hopefully honesty for the sake of honesty, but a hope that by being more honest and candid about these experiences, that we can all collectively bend that happiness baseline up a little bit.
RG + AV: Thank you.
(Applause)
My name is Mwende Katwiwa and I am a poet, a Pan-Africanist and a freedom fighter.
I was 23 years old when I first heard about Reproductive Justice.
I was working at Women with a Vision, where I learned that Reproductive Justice was defined by Sister Song as: One: A woman's right to decide if and when she will have a baby and the conditions under which she will give birth.
Two: A woman's right to decide if she will not have a baby and her options for preventing or ending a pregnancy.
And three: A woman's right to parent the children she already has in safe and healthy environments without fear of violence from individuals or the government.
I've always wanted to be a mother.
Growing up, I heard all about the joys of motherhood.
I used to dream of watching my womb weave wonder into this world.
See, I knew I was young.
But I figured, it couldn't hurt to start planning for something so big, so early.
But now, I'm 26 years old.
And I don't know if I have what it takes to stomach motherhood in this country.
See, over the years, America has taught me more about parenting than any book on the subject.
It has taught me how some women give birth to babies and others to suspects.
It has taught me that this body will birth kin who are more likely to be held in prison cells than to hold college degrees.
There is something about being Black in America that has made motherhood seem complicated.
Seem like, I don't know what to do to raise my kids right and keep them alive.
Do I tell my son not to steal because it is wrong, or because they will use it to justify his death?
Do I tell him that even if he pays for his Skittles and sweet tea there will still be those who will watch him and see a criminal before child; who will call the police and not wait for them to come.
Do I even want the police to come?
Too many Sean Bells go off in my head when I consider calling 911.
I will not take it for Oscar Grant-ed that they will not come and kill my son.
So, we may have gotten rid of the nooses, but I still consider it lynching when they murder Black boys and leave their bodies for four hours in the sun.
As a historical reminder that there is something about being Black in America that has made motherhood sound like mourning.
Sound like one morning I could wake up and see my son as a repeat of last week's story.
Sound like I could wake up and realize the death of my daughter wouldn't even be newsworthy.
So you can't tell me that Sandra Bland is the only Black woman whose violence deserves more than our silence.
What about our other dark-skinned daughters in distress whose deaths we have yet to remember?
What about our children whose lives don't fit neatly between the lives of your genders?
See, apparently, nothing is a great protector if you come out of a body that looks like this.
See, there is something about being Black in America that has made motherhood sound like something I'm not sure I look forward to.
I've written too many poems about dead Black children to be naïve about the fact that there could one day be a poem written about my kids.
But I do not want to be a mother who gave birth to poems.
I do not want a stanza for a son nor a line for a little girl nor a footnote for a child who doesn't fit into this world.
No.
I do not want children who will live forever in the pages of poetry, yet can't seem to outlive me.
(Applause) I was invited to the TEDWomen conference to perform a poem.
But for me, poetry is not about art and performance.
It is a form of protest.
Yesterday, during rehearsal, I was told that there had been two to three recent TED Talks about Black Lives Matter.
That maybe I should cut down my TED Talk so it could "just" be about Reproductive Justice.
But that poem and this talk is fundamentally about my inability to separate the two.
I was 21 years old -- (Applause) I was 21 years old when Trayvon Martin was murdered.
Trayvon Martin, a 17-year-old Black boy, a Black child, reminded me reminded us how little this nation actually values Black life.
The hashtag #BlackLivesMatter became the most recognized call for Black people and our children to live in safe environments and healthy communities without fear from violence from individuals or the state or government.
Months later, when George Zimmerman was not held responsible for murdering Trayvon Martin, I heard Sybrina Fulton, Trayvon Martin's mother, speak.
Her testimony so deeply impacted me that I found myself constantly asking, what would it mean to mother in the United Stated of America in this skin?
What does motherhood really mean, when for so many who look like me it is synonymous with mourning?
Without realizing it, I had begun to link the Reproductive Justice framework and the Movement for Black Lives.
As I learned more about Reproductive Justice at Women With A Vision, and as I continued to be active in the Movement for Black Lives, I found myself wanting others to see and feel these similarities.
I found myself asking: Whose job is it in times like this to connect ideas realities and people?
I want to dedicate this talk and that poem to Constance Malcolm.
She is the mother of Ramarley Graham who was another Black child who was murdered before their time.
She reminded me once over dinner, as I was struggling to write that poem, that it is the artist's job to unearth stories that people try to bury with shovels of complacency and time.
Recently, Toni Morrison wrote, "In times of dread, artists must never choose to remain silent.
There is no time for self-pity, no room for fear."
Yesterday, during rehearsal, when I was told that I should "maybe cut the Black Lives Matter portion from my talk," I found myself fearful for a moment.
Fearful that again our stories were being denied the very stages they deserve to be told on.
And then I remembered the words I had just spoken.
"In times of dread, artists must never choose to remain silent.
There is no time for self-pity.
(Applause) There is no time for self-pity.
And no room for fear."
And I have made my choice.
And I am always choosing.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Everyone, please think of your biggest personal goal.
For real -- you can take a second.
You've got to feel this to learn it.
Take a few seconds and think of your personal biggest goal, okay?
Imagine deciding right now that you're going to do it.
Imagine telling someone that you meet today what you're going to do.
Imagine their congratulations, and their high image of you.
Doesn't it feel good to say it out loud?
Don't you feel one step closer already, like it's already becoming part of your identity?
Well, bad news: you should have kept your mouth shut, because that good feeling now will make you less likely to do it.
The repeated psychology tests have proven that telling someone your goal makes it less likely to happen.
Any time you have a goal, there are some steps that need to be done, some work that needs to be done in order to achieve it.
Ideally you would not be satisfied until you'd actually done the work.
But when you tell someone your goal and they acknowledge it, psychologists have found that it's called a "social reality."
The mind is kind of tricked into feeling that it's already done.
And then because you've felt that satisfaction, you're less motivated to do the actual hard work necessary.
(Laughter) So this goes against conventional wisdom that we should tell our friends our goals, right?
So they hold us to it.
So, let's look at the proof.
1926: Kurt Lewin, founder of social psychology, called this "substitution."
1933: Wera Mahler found when it was acknowledged by others, it felt real in the mind.
1982, Peter Gollwitzer wrote a whole book about this, and in 2009, he did some new tests that were published.
It goes like this: 163 people across four separate tests.
Everyone wrote down their personal goal.
Then half of them announced their commitment to this goal to the room, and half didn't.
Then everyone was given 45 minutes of work that would directly lead them towards their goal, but they were told that they could stop at any time.
Now, those who kept their mouths shut worked the entire 45 minutes on average, and when asked afterward, said that they felt that they had a long way to go still to achieve their goal.
But those who had announced it quit after only 33 minutes, on average, and when asked afterward, said that they felt much closer to achieving their goal.
So if this is true, what can we do?
Well, you could resist the temptation to announce your goal.
You can delay the gratification that the social acknowledgment brings, and you can understand that your mind mistakes the talking for the doing.
But if you do need to talk about something, you can state it in a way that gives you no satisfaction, such as, "I really want to run this marathon, so I need to train five times a week and kick my ass if I don't, okay?"
So audience, next time you're tempted to tell someone your goal, what will you say?
(Silence) Exactly!
Well done.
(Laughter) (Applause)
When I was seven years old, some well-meaning adult asked me what I wanted to be when I grew up.
Proudly, I said: "An artist."
"No, you don't," he said, "You can't make a living being an artist!"
My little seven-year-old Picasso dreams were crushed.
But I gathered myself, went off in search of a new dream, eventually settling on being a scientist, perhaps something like the next Albert Einstein.
(Laughter) I have always loved math and science, later, coding.
And so I decided to study computer programming in college.
In my junior year, my computer graphics professor showed us these wonderful short films.

