(Applause)
Shah Rukh Khan: "A girl should be seen, not heard."
"Be quiet," or, "chup."
These words are often used to silence girls right from childhood, well into adulthood and deep into old age.
I'm proud to introduce our next speaker, a true champion of the female voice, an advisor on poverty, gender and development for the World Bank, United Nations and several NGOs in India and the world over.
She calls herself a cultural detective.
Let's raise our voices to welcome renowned social scientist and author Deepa Narayan.
(Music) (Applause) Deepa Narayan: The goal of every loving parent is to raise good girls, but what parents actually do is to constrain, confine and crush their girls.
So as they crush their girls, they prepare them for abuse.
This would be so devastating that no parent would be able to bear it, so it's disguised.
In India, we call this "adjusting."
I'm sure you've heard the word.
"Darling, just adjust a bit.
Just adjust.
No matter what happens, just adjust."
"Adjust" trains girls to be powerless, not to exist, not to be seen, not to have a self, and it trains boys to claim power and authority over the world.
And in the meantime we keep talking about gender equality and women's empowerment.
After 2012, after the gang rape in a moving bus in Delhi, I really wanted to understand the roots of abuse.
So I started asking a very simple question: what does it mean to you to be a good woman or a good man today?
And I was so surprised by what I heard, the answers particularly that young people gave, that the project became a research project and it took over my life.
For three years, I listened to over 600 women, men and children, educated, middle class, and it led to 1,800 hours of listening and 8,000 pages of notes, and it took another year to make sense of it.
Nowadays, we see well-dressed, educated women like many of you in this room, all of you in this room, and myself, and we think the world has changed, but these external changes are extremely misleading, because on the inside, we have not changed.
So today, I'm not going to talk about poor people.
I'm going to talk only about the middle and upper classes, because we are the ones most in denial.
We are the ones who have said over and over again that when women are educated, when they're employed and they earn incomes, they will be equal, empowered and free.
They're not.
Why?
From my research, I identify seven habits that delete women, that make women disappear, but these habits persist because they're so familiar to us and we've made them good and moral.
Why would you change or drop anything that's good and moral?
So, on the one hand, we love our children, we love our daughters, and on the other hand, we crush them.
Habit one: You don't have a body.
The first step to make a girl a ghost is to make her body disappear, to pretend that she doesn't have a body.
Akangsha, who is 23, said, "In my family, we never spoke about the body, never."
And it is in this silence that millions and millions of girls get sexually molested, and they don't even tell their mothers.
And it's the negative comments from others that leads to 90 percent of women saying that they dislike their bodies.
When a girl rejects her body, she rejects her only house and invisibility and insecurity become her very shaky foundation.
Habit two: Be quiet.
Chup.
If you're not supposed to exist and you don't have a body, how can you have a voice?
So just about every woman said, "When I was little, my mother used to scold me and say, 'Don't speak, be quiet, be chup, speak softly, don't argue and never answer back.
Jawab nahi Dena.'"
I'm sure you've all heard that.
And so girls become afraid, and they withdraw.
And they become quiet and they say, "Let it go.
Jaane do.
What's the point?
Nobody listens."
Educated women said that their number one problem was their inability to speak up, as if there was a foot on their throat ready to choke them.
Silence slices off women.
Habit three: Be a people pleaser.
Please others.
Everyone likes a nice woman who always smiles, who never says no, who is never angry, even when she's being exploited.
Amisha, who is 18, said, "My father said, 'If I don't see you smiling, I don't feel good.'"
So she smiles.
So her father is teaching her, my happiness is more important than your happiness.
And in this business of trying to make everyone happy all the time, girls become afraid to make decisions.
And when you ask them, they say, "Anything, whatever!
Kuch bhi!
Everything goes.
Chalta hai."
Darsha, who is 25, said with great pride, "I'm highly elastic.
I become whatever others want me to be."
Such girls give up their dreams, their desires, and nobody even notices, except for depression.
It moves in.
Another slice of a girl is taken off.
Habit four: You have no sexuality.
I think you'd all agree that with a population of over 1.3 billion, sex is not new to India.
What is new is that more people now acknowledge that women, too, have a right to sexual desire.
But how can a woman who has not been allowed to own her body, who hasn't been educated about her body, who may have been sexually molested, who cannot say no and who has been filled with shame, how can she claim her sexual desire?
A woman's sexuality is suppressed.
Habit five: Don't trust women.
Imagine how the world would change if women came together in solidarity, but as to make sure that this doesn't happen, our culture places high moral value on loyalty to men and family secrecy.
Woman after woman said, "I know only one trustworthy woman, and that's me."
Even Ruchi, who is 30 and who works on women's empowerment at Delhi University, said, "I don't trust women.
They're jealous and they backbite."
Obviously, then, in cities, women don't join women's groups, and when you ask them why, they say, "We don't have time for gossip."
It's much easier to demolish a woman who is alone.
Habit six: Duty over desire.
Muskan gave a very long definition of a good girl, and she's only 15.
"She is kind, gentle, polite, loving, caring, truthful, obedient, respects elders, helps everyone unconditionally, and is good to others and fulfills duty."
Tiring, isn't it.
By the time you fulfill duty, whatever little desire is left is also lost.
And when sacrificing mothers have nothing left to say except talk about food -- "Have you eaten?
Khana kha liya?
What will you eat?" -- men like Saurabh, who is 24, call them "boring."
A woman becomes a residue.
Habit seven: Be totally dependent.
So all these habits collectively crush women, fill her with fear and make her totally dependent on men for her survival, and this allows the system of male power to continue.
So all these seven habits that we thought were good and moral snatch life away from girls and position men to abuse.
We must change.
How do we change?
A habit is just a habit.
Every habit is a learned habit, so we can unlearn them and this personal change is extremely important.
I had to change too.
But this doesn't change the system that crushes millions of other women.
So we have to go to the roots.
We must change what it means to be a good woman and a good man, because this a foundation of every society.
We don't need elastic women, we need elastic definitions, for men too, and this big societal change cannot happen without men's involvement.
We need you.
We need men to become champions of change, to develop strong change muscles.
Otherwise, it will be two more centuries before our girls, and our boys, are safe and free.
Imagine half a billion women coming together, with the support of men, to talk to one another for conversation, for change, both personal and political, and imagine men in their own circles, and imagine women and men coming together to just listen to each other without judgment, without blame, without accusations and without shame.
Imagine how much we would change.
We can do this together.
Women, don't adjust.
Men, adjust.
It's time.
Thank you.
(Applause) SRK: How well said, how wonderful.
Everyone, Deepa, please.
Listening to her, I realized that even in the simplest conversations that we have with women, we're actually being aggressive.
For example, I do tell my daughter sometimes, "Yaar Tu hasti hai to mujhe accha lagta hai varna bura lagta hai".
So sorry, I would never do that.
Aaj Se main meri beti ko yahi bolunga.
Whatever you're doing, mujhe accha hi lagta hai, aur accha nahi bhi lagta hai Toh mera kya, tum wohi karo jo tumhare ko lagta hai, right?
(Applause) How did you feel, first listening to so many unfulfilled stories, desires, lack of independence, of girls that you normally would assume we think these girls are better off?
DN: Very depressed.
It was shocking for me, and that's why I couldn't stop, because I had no plans to do a study and no plans to write a book.
I'd written 17 books before, and I thought, "I'm done," but when I went to St. Stephen's College and I heard, at most elite colleges you well know from Delhi, and the young women and the men, what they said about what it meant to them to be a woman and man sounded not like me but like my mother's generation.
So then I went to another college and another college.
The thing that was striking to me is that each woman felt she was alone, that she hides her fear and hides her behavior, because she thinks it's a personal fault.
It's not a personal fault, it's training, and I think that's the biggest revelation is that, if we stop pretending, then the world changes.
SRK: Do you girls all agree with what Deepa is saying?
(Applause) Already see that young girl saying, "Heard, heard what she said?
You say this to me."
Yeah, that's the way it should be.
You, boy, you adjust.
We are not adjusting anymore, OK?
(Applause) Thank you so much.
Have a good evening.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Every weekend for as long as I can remember, my father would get up on a Saturday, put on a worn sweatshirt and he'd scrape away at the squeaky old wheel of a house that we lived in.
I wouldn't even call it restoration; it was a ritual, catharsis.
He would spend all year scraping paint with this old heat gun and a spackle knife, and then he would repaint where he scraped, only to begin again the following year.
Scraping and re-scraping, painting and repainting: the work of an old house is never meant to be done.
The day my father turned 52, I got a phone call.
My mother was on the line to tell me that doctors had found a lump in his stomach -- terminal cancer, she told me, and he had been given only three weeks to live.
I immediately moved home to Poughkeepsie, New York, to sit with my father on death watch, not knowing what the next days would bring us.
To keep myself distracted, I rolled up my sleeves, and I went about finishing what he could now no longer complete -- the restoration of our old home.
When that looming three-week deadline came and then went, he was still alive.
And at three months, he joined me.
We gutted and repainted the interior.
At six months, the old windows were refinished, and at 18 months, the rotted porch was finally replaced.
And there was my father, standing with me outside, admiring a day's work, hair on his head, fully in remission, when he turned to me and he said, "You know, Michael, this house saved my life."
So the following year, I decided to go to architecture school.
(Laughter) But there, I learned something different about buildings.
Recognition seemed to come to those who prioritized novel and sculptural forms, like ribbons, or ...
pickles?
(Laughter) And I think this is supposed to be a snail.
Something about this bothered me.
Why was it that the best architects, the greatest architecture -- all beautiful and visionary and innovative -- is also so rare, and seems to serve so very few?
And more to the point: With all of this creative talent, what more could we do?
Just as I was about to start my final exams, I decided to take a break from an all-nighter and go to a lecture by Dr. Paul Farmer, a leading health activist for the global poor.
I was surprised to hear a doctor talking about architecture.
Buildings are making people sicker, he said, and for the poorest in the world, this is causing epidemic-level problems.
In this hospital in South Africa, patients that came in with, say, a broken leg, to wait in this unventilated hallway, walked out with a multidrug-resistant strand of tuberculosis.
Simple designs for infection control had not been thought about, and people had died because of it.
"Where are the architects?"
Paul said.
If hospitals are making people sicker, where are the architects and designers to help us build and design hospitals that allow us to heal?
That following summer, I was in the back of a Land Rover with a few classmates, bumping over the mountainous hillside of Rwanda.
For the next year, I'd be living in Butaro in this old guesthouse, which was a jail after the genocide.
I was there to design and build a new type of hospital with Dr. Farmer and his team.
If hallways are making patients sicker, what if we could design a hospital that flips the hallways on the outside, and makes people walk in the exterior?
If mechanical systems rarely work, what if we could design a hospital that could breathe through natural ventilation, and meanwhile reduce its environmental footprint?
And what about the patients' experience?
Evidence shows that a simple view of nature can radically improve health outcomes, So why couldn't we design a hospital where every patient had a window with a view?
Simple, site-specific designs can make a hospital that heals.
Designing it is one thing; getting it built, we learned, is quite another.
We worked with Bruce Nizeye, a brilliant engineer, and he thought about construction differently than I had been taught in school.
When we had to excavate this enormous hilltop and a bulldozer was expensive and hard to get to site, Bruce suggested doing it by hand, using a method in Rwanda called "Ubudehe," which means "community works for the community."
Hundreds of people came with shovels and hoes, and we excavated that hill in half the time and half the cost of that bulldozer.
Instead of importing furniture, Bruce started a guild, and he brought in master carpenters to train others in how to make furniture by hand.
And on this job site, 15 years after the Rwandan genocide, Bruce insisted that we bring on labor from all backgrounds, and that half of them be women.
Bruce was using the process of building to heal, not just for those who were sick, but for the entire community as a whole.
We call this the locally fabricated way of building, or "lo-fab," and it has four pillars: hire locally, source regionally, train where you can and most importantly, think about every design decision as an opportunity to invest in the dignity of the places where you serve.
Think of it like the local food movement, but for architecture.
And we're convinced that this way of building can be replicated across the world, and change the way we talk about and evaluate architecture.
Using the lo-fab way of building, even aesthetic decisions can be designed to impact people's lives.
In Butaro, we chose to use a local volcanic stone found in abundance within the area, but often considered a nuisance by farmers, and piled on the side of the road.
We worked with these masons to cut these stones and form them into the walls of the hospital.
And when they began on this corner and wrapped around the entire hospital, they were so good at putting these stones together, they asked us if they could take down the original wall and rebuild it.
And you see what is possible.
It's beautiful.
And the beauty, to me, comes from the fact that I know that hands cut these stones, and they formed them into this thick wall, made only in this place with rocks from this soil.
When you go outside today and you look at your built world, ask not only: "What is the environmental footprint?" -- an important question -- but what if we also asked, "What is the human handprint of those who made it?"
We started a new practice based around these questions, and we tested it around the world.
Like in Haiti, where we asked if a new hospital could help end the epidemic of cholera.
In this 100-bed hospital, we designed a simple strategy to clean contaminated medical waste before it enters the water table, and our partners at Les Centres GHESKIO are already saving lives because of it.
Or Malawi: we asked if a birthing center could radically reduce maternal and infant mortality.
Malawi has one of the highest rates of maternal and infant death in the world.
Using a simple strategy to be replicated nationally, we designed a birthing center that would attract women and their attendants to come to the hospital earlier and therefore have safer births.
Or in the Congo, where we asked if an educational center could also be used to protect endangered wildlife.
Poaching for ivory and bushmeat is leading to global epidemic, disease transfer and war.
In one of the hardest-to-reach places in the world, we used the mud and the dirt and the wood around us to construct a center that would show us ways to protect and conserve our rich biodiversity.
Even here in the US, we were asked to rethink the largest university for the deaf and hard of hearing in the world.
The deaf community, through sign language, shows us the power of visual communication.
We designed a campus that would awaken the ways in which we as humans all communicate, both verbally and nonverbally.
And even in Poughkeepsie, my hometown, we thought about old industrial infrastructure.
We wondered: Could we use arts and culture and design to revitalize this city and other Rust Belt cities across our nation, and turn them into centers for innovation and growth?
In each of these projects, we asked a simple question: What more can architecture do?
And by asking that question, we were forced to consider how we could create jobs, how we could source regionally and how we could invest in the dignity of the communities in which we serve.
I have learned that architecture can be a transformative engine for change.
About a year ago, I read an article about a tireless and intrepid civil rights leader named Bryan Stevenson.
(Applause) And Bryan had a bold architectural vision.
He and his team had been documenting the over 4,000 lynchings of African-Americans that have happened in the American South.
And they had a plan to mark every county where these lynchings occurred, and build a national memorial to the victims of lynching in Montgomery, Alabama.
Countries like Germany and South Africa and, of course, Rwanda, have found it necessary to build memorials to reflect on the atrocities of their past, in order to heal their national psyche.
We have yet to do this in the United States.
So I sent a cold email to info@equaljusticeintiative.org: "Dear Bryan," it said, "I think your building project is maybe the most important project we could do in America and could change the way we think about racial injustice.
By any chance, do you know who will design it?"
(Laughter) Surprisingly, shockingly, Bryan got right back to me, and invited me down to meet with his team and talk to them.
Needless to say, I canceled all my meetings and I jumped on a plane to Montgomery, Alabama.
When I got there, Bryan and his team picked me up, and we walked around the city.
And they took the time to point out the many markers that have been placed all over the city to the history of the Confederacy, and the very few that mark the history of slavery.
And then he walked me to a hill.
It overlooked the whole city.

