But you ask the Indians, and they say, "The plants talk to us."
Well, what does that mean?
This tribe, the Cofan, has 17 varieties of ayahuasca, all of which they distinguish a great distance in the forest, all of which are referable to our eye as one species.
And then you ask them how they establish their taxonomy and they say, "I thought you knew something about plants.
I mean, don't you know anything?"
And I said, "No."
Well, it turns out you take each of the 17 varieties in the night of a full moon, and it sings to you in a different key.
Now, that's not going to get you a Ph.D. at Harvard, but it's a lot more interesting than counting stamens.
(Laughter) Now -- (Applause) -- the problem -- the problem is that even those of us sympathetic with the plight of indigenous people view them as quaint and colorful but somehow reduced to the margins of history as the real world, meaning our world, moves on.
Well, the truth is the 20th century, 300 years from now, is not going to be remembered for its wars or its technological innovations, but rather as the era in which we stood by and either actively endorsed or passively accepted the massive destruction of both biological and cultural diversity on the planet.
Now, the problem isn't change.
All cultures through all time have constantly been engaged in a dance with new possibilities of life.
And the problem is not technology itself.
The Sioux Indians did not stop being Sioux when they gave up the bow and arrow any more than an American stopped being an American when he gave up the horse and buggy.
It's not change or technology that threatens the integrity of the ethnosphere.
It is power, the crude face of domination.
Wherever you look around the world, you discover that these are not cultures destined to fade away; these are dynamic living peoples being driven out of existence by identifiable forces that are beyond their capacity to adapt to: whether it's the egregious deforestation in the homeland of the Penan -- a nomadic people from Southeast Asia, from Sarawak -- a people who lived free in the forest until a generation ago, and now have all been reduced to servitude and prostitution on the banks of the rivers, where you can see the river itself is soiled with the silt that seems to be carrying half of Borneo away to the South China Sea, where the Japanese freighters hang light in the horizon ready to fill their holds with raw logs ripped from the forest -- or, in the case of the Yanomami, it's the disease entities that have come in, in the wake of the discovery of gold.
Or if we go into the mountains of Tibet, where I'm doing a lot of research recently, you'll see it's a crude face of political domination.
You know, genocide, the physical extinction of a people is universally condemned, but ethnocide, the destruction of people's way of life, is not only not condemned, it's universally, in many quarters, celebrated as part of a development strategy.
And you cannot understand the pain of Tibet until you move through it at the ground level.
I once travelled 6,000 miles from Chengdu in Western China overland through southeastern Tibet to Lhasa with a young colleague, and it was only when I got to Lhasa that I understood the face behind the statistics you hear about: 6,000 sacred monuments torn apart to dust and ashes, 1.2 million people killed by the cadres during the Cultural Revolution.
This young man's father had been ascribed to the Panchen Lama.
That meant he was instantly killed at the time of the Chinese invasion.
His uncle fled with His Holiness in the Diaspora that took the people to Nepal.
His mother was incarcerated for the crime of being wealthy.
He was smuggled into the jail at the age of two to hide beneath her skirt tails because she couldn't bear to be without him.
The sister who had done that brave deed was put into an education camp.
One day she inadvertently stepped on an armband of Mao, and for that transgression, she was given seven years of hard labor.
The pain of Tibet can be impossible to bear, but the redemptive spirit of the people is something to behold.
And in the end, then, it really comes down to a choice: do we want to live in a monochromatic world of monotony or do we want to embrace a polychromatic world of diversity?
Margaret Mead, the great anthropologist, said, before she died, that her greatest fear was that as we drifted towards this blandly amorphous generic world view not only would we see the entire range of the human imagination reduced to a more narrow modality of thought, but that we would wake from a dream one day having forgotten there were even other possibilities.
And it's humbling to remember that our species has, perhaps, been around for years.
The Neolithic Revolution -- which gave us agriculture, at which time we succumbed to the cult of the seed; the poetry of the shaman was displaced by the prose of the priesthood; we created hierarchy specialization surplus -- is only 10,000 years ago.
The modern industrial world as we know it is barely 300 years old.
Now, that shallow history doesn't suggest to me that we have all the answers for all of the challenges that will confront us in the ensuing millennia.
When these myriad cultures of the world are asked the meaning of being human, they respond with 10,000 different voices.
And it's within that song that we will all rediscover the possibility of being what we are: a fully conscious species, fully aware of ensuring that all peoples and all gardens find a way to flourish.
And there are great moments of optimism.
This is a photograph I took at the northern tip of Baffin Island when I went narwhal hunting with some Inuit people, and this man, Olayuk, told me a marvelous story of his grandfather.
The Canadian government has not always been kind to the Inuit people, and during the 1950s, to establish our sovereignty, we forced them into settlements.
This old man's grandfather refused to go.
The family, fearful for his life, took away all of his weapons, all of his tools.
Now, you must understand that the Inuit did not fear the cold; they took advantage of it.
The runners of their sleds were originally made of fish wrapped in caribou hide.
So, this man's grandfather was not intimidated by the Arctic night or the blizzard that was blowing.
He simply slipped outside, pulled down his sealskin trousers and defecated into his hand.
And as the feces began to freeze, he shaped it into the form of a blade.
He put a spray of saliva on the edge of the shit knife and as it finally froze solid, he butchered a dog with it.
He skinned the dog and improvised a harness, took the ribcage of the dog and improvised a sled, harnessed up an adjacent dog, and disappeared over the ice floes, shit knife in belt.
Talk about getting by with nothing.
(Laughter) And this, in many ways -- (Applause) -- is a symbol of the resilience of the Inuit people and of all indigenous people around the world.
The Canadian government in April of 1999 gave back to total control of the Inuit an area of land larger than California and Texas put together.
It's our new homeland.
It's called Nunavut.
It's an independent territory.
They control all mineral resources.
An amazing example of how a nation-state can seek restitution with its people.
And finally, in the end, I think it's pretty obvious at least to all of all us who've traveled in these remote reaches of the planet, to realize that they're not remote at all.
They're homelands of somebody.
They represent branches of the human imagination that go back to the dawn of time.
And for all of us, the dreams of these children, like the dreams of our own children, become part of the naked geography of hope.
So, what we're trying to do at the National Geographic, finally, is, we believe that politicians will never accomplish anything.
We think that polemics -- (Applause) -- we think that polemics are not persuasive, but we think that storytelling can change the world, and so we are probably the best storytelling institution in the world.
We get 35 million hits on our website every month.
156 nations carry our television channel.
Our magazines are read by millions.
And what we're doing is a series of journeys to the ethnosphere where we're going to take our audience to places of such cultural wonder that they cannot help but come away dazzled by what they have seen, and hopefully, therefore, embrace gradually, one by one, the central revelation of anthropology: that this world deserves to exist in a diverse way, that we can find a way to live in a truly multicultural, pluralistic world where all of the wisdom of all peoples can contribute to our collective well-being.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Well, hello.
This is Sophie.
It's all right, don't worry, everything's going to be fine.
(Laughter) There are some people on the balcony that are very happy to be up there now.
(Laughter) So this is Sophie -- not Sophia -- no, Sophie.
She has a French name.
And you wonder why?
(Laughter) So Sophie, for most people, is the incarnation of terror, really.
She's far too leggy, she's far too hairy, and she's far too big to ever be trusted.
But to me, Sophie is a fantastic feat of bioengineering.
You see, Sophie is a testimony to all those creatures that have managed to survive since the beginning of time; all those animals that have managed to have offspring generation after generation, until this day.
You see, over one billion years ago, the first primitive cells started to evolve on this planet.
It took spiders 430 million years to become what they are now: one of the most versatile, one of the most diverse and one of the most evolved groups -- (Laughter) of predators to ever walk this earth.
It's actually quite sporty to give a speech while wrangling a tarantula, I have to say.
(Laughter) So, we shouldn't forget that Sophie -- and in fact, all of us -- we all are a testimony to all those ruthless battles that actually were won consistently by all our ancestors, all our predecessors.
In fact, all of us, every single one of you, is in fact an uninterrupted, one-billion-years-old success story.
And in the gaze of Sophie, that success is partly due to what she has in her chest, just under her eyes.
In there, she has a pair of venom glands that are attached to a pair of fangs, and those fangs are folded into her mouth.
So, without those fangs and without this venom, Sophie would have never managed to survive.
Now, many animals have evolved venom systems in order to survive.
Nowadays, any species of venomous snakes, any species of spider, any species of scorpion, has its own venom signature, if you will, made out of dozens, if not hundreds, of chemical compounds.
And all of those compounds have evolved purely for one purpose: disable and, eventually, kill.
Now, venom can actually act in many different ways.
Venom, believe me, can make you feel pains that you've never felt before.
Venom can also make your heart stop within minutes, or it can turn your blood into jelly.
Venom can also paralyze you almost instantly, or it can just eat your flesh away, like acid.
Now, all of these are pretty gruesome stories, I know, but, to me, it's kind of music to my ears.
It's what I love.
So why is that?
Well, it's not because I'm a nutcase, no.
(Laughter) Just imagine what we could do if we could harvest all those super powerful compounds and use them to our benefit.
That would be amazing, right?
What if we could, I don't know, produce new antibiotics with those venoms?
What if we could actually help people that are suffering from diabetes or hypertension?
Well, in fact, all those applications are already being developed by scientists just like me everywhere around the world, as I speak.
You see, hypertension is actually treated regularly with a medication that has been developed from the toxin that is produced by a South American viper.
People that have type 2 diabetes can be monitored using, actually, the toxin produced by a lizard from North America.
And in hospitals all around the world, a new protocol is being developed to use a toxin from a marine snail for anesthetics.
You see, venom is that kind of huge library of chemical compounds that are available to us, that are produced by hundreds of thousands of live creatures.
And -- Oh, sorry, she just wants to go for a little walk.
(Laughter) Spiders alone are actually thought to produce over 10 million different kinds of compounds with potential therapeutic application.
10 million.
And do you know how many scientists actually have managed to study so far?
About 0.01 percent.
So that means that there is still 99.99 percent of all those compounds that are out there, completely unknown, and are just waiting to be harvested and tested, which is fantastic.
You see, so far, scientists have concentrated their efforts on very charismatic, very dangerous animals -- vipers and cobras or scorpions and black widows.
But what about all those little bugs that we actually have all around us?
You know, like that spider that lives behind your couch?
You know, the one that decides to just shoot through the floor when you're watching TV and freaks you out?
Ah, you have that one at home as well.
(Laughter) Well, what about those guys?
Do they actually produce some kind of amazing compound in their tiny body as well?
Well, an honest answer a few months ago would have been, "We have no clue."
But now that my students and myself have started to look into it, I can tell you those guys actually are producing very, very interesting compounds.
And I'm going to tell you more about that in a second, but first, I would like to tell you more about this "we are looking into it."
How does one look into it?
Well, first of all, my students and I have to capture a lot of spiders.
So how do we do that?
Well, you'd be surprised.
Once one starts to look, one finds a lot of spiders.
They actually live everywhere around us.
Within a couple of hours, we are capable of catching maybe two, three, four hundred spiders, and we bring them back to my laboratory, and we house each of them in its own individual home.
And we give each of them a little meal.
So now I know what you're thinking: "This guy's nuts.
He has a spider B&amp;B at work ..."
(Laughter) No, no it's not exactly that, and it's not the kind of venture I would advise you to start.
No, once we're done with that, we wait a few days, and then, we anesthetize those spiders.
Once they're asleep, we run a tiny little electric current through their body and that contracts their venom glads.
Then, under a microscope, we can see a tiny little droplet of venom appearing.
So we take a hair-thin glass tube, a capillary, and we collect that tiny droplet.
Then, we take the spider and we put it back into its home, and we start again with another one.
Because spiders are completely unharmed during the process, it means that a few days later, once they've produced a little bit of venom again and they've recovered, we can release them back into the wild.
It takes literally hundreds of spiders to just produce the equivalent of one raindrop of venom.
So that drop is incredibly precious to us.
And once we have it, we freeze it, and we then pass it in a machine that will separate and purify every chemical compound that is in that venom.
We're speaking about tiny amounts.
We're actually speaking about a tenth of a millionth of a liter of compound, but we can dilute that compound several thousand times in its own volume of water and then test it against a whole range of nasty stuff, like cancer cells or bacteria.
And this is when the very exciting part of my job starts, because this is pure scientific gambling.
It's kind of "Las Vegas, baby," for me.
(Laughter) We spend so many hours, so much resources, so much time trying to get those compounds ready, and then we test them.
And most of the time, nothing happens.
Nothing at all.
But once in a while -- just once in a while, we get that particular compound that has absolutely amazing effects.
That's the jackpot.
And when I'm saying that, actually, I should take out something else from my pocket -- be afraid, be very afraid.
(Laughter) Now, in that little tube, I have, actually, a very common spider.
The kind of spider that you could find in your shed, that you could find in your basement or that you could find in your sewer pipe, understand: in your toilet.
Now, that little spider happens to produce amazingly powerful antimicrobial compounds.
It is even capable of killing those drug-resistant bacteria that are giving us so much trouble, that are often making media headlines.
Now, honestly, if I was living in your sewer pipe, I'd produce antibiotics, too.
(Laughter) But that little spider, may actually hold the answer to a very, very serious concern we have.
You see, around the world, every single day, about 1,700 people die because of antimicrobial-resistant infections.
Multiply that by 365, and you're reaching the staggering number of 700,000 people dead every single year because antibiotics that were efficient 30, 20 or 10 years ago are not capable of killing very common bugs.
The reality is that the world is running out of antibiotics, and the pharmaceutical industry does not have any answer, actually, any weapon to address that concern.
You see, 30 years ago, you could consider that 10 to 15 new kinds of antibiotics would hit the market every couple of years.
Do you know how many of them hit the market in the past five years?
Two.
The reality is that if we continue this way, we are a few decades away from being completely helpless in front of infections, just like we were before the discovery of penicillin 90 years ago.
So you see, the reality is that we are at war against an invisible enemy that adapts and evolves a lot quicker than we do.
And in that war, this little spider might be one of our greatest secret weapons.
Just a half a millionth of a liter of a venom, diluted 10,000 times, is still capable of killing most bacteria that are resistant to any other kind of antibiotics.
It's absolutely amazing.
Every time I repeat this experiment, I just wonder: How is that possible?
How many other possibilities and secrets do the siblings actually have?
What kind of wonderful product can we really find, if we care to look?
So when people ask me, "Are bugs really the future of therapeutic drugs?"
my answer is, "Well, I really believe that they do hold some key answers."
And we need to really give ourselves the means to investigate them.
So when you head back home later tonight, and you see that spider in the corner of your room ...
(Laughter) don't squash it.
(Laughter) Just look at it, admire it and remember that it is an absolutely fantastic creature, a pure product of evolution, and that maybe that very spider, one day, will hold the answer, will hold the key to your very own survival.
You see, she's not so insignificant anymore now, is she?
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine two people are listening to music.
What are the odds that they are listening to the exact same playlist?
Probably pretty low.
After all, everyone has very different tastes in music.
Now, what are the odds that your body will need the exact same medical care and treatment as another person's body?
Even lower.
As we go through our lives, each of us will have very different needs for our own healthcare.
Scientists and doctors are constantly researching ways to make medicine more personalized.
One way they are doing this is by researching stem cells.
Stem cells are cells that are undifferentiated, meaning they do not have a specific job or function.

