And in order to understand the issue from all angles and to truly do a thorough job, I realized I had to download one of the world's most popular dating apps myself.
So I went home to my wife ...
(Laughter) who I had just married.
"Is it OK if I establish a profile on a very popular dating app for purely scientific purposes?"
(Laughter) This is what we found.
Hidden behind the main menu was a preticked box that gave the dating company access to all my personal pictures on Facebook, in my case more than 2,000 of them, and some were quite personal.
And to make matters worse, when we read the terms and conditions, we discovered the following, and I'm going to need to take out my reading glasses for this one.
And I'm going to read it for you, because this is complicated.
All right.
"By posting content" -- and content refers to your pictures, chat and other interactions in the dating service -- "as a part of the service, you automatically grant to the company, its affiliates, licensees and successors an irrevocable" -- which means you can't change your mind -- "perpetual" -- which means forever -- "nonexclusive, transferrable, sublicensable, fully paid-up, worldwide right and license to use, copy, store, perform, display, reproduce, record, play, adapt, modify and distribute the content, prepare derivative works of the content, or incorporate the content into other works and grant and authorize sublicenses of the foregoing in any media now known or hereafter created."
That basically means that all your dating history and everything related to it can be used for any purpose for all time.
Just imagine your children seeing your sassy dating photos in a birth control ad 20 years from now.
But seriously, though -- (Laughter) what might these commercial practices mean to you?
For example, financial loss: based on your web browsing history, algorithms might decide whether you will get a mortgage or not.
Subconscious manipulation: companies can analyze your emotions based on your photos and chats, targeting you with ads when you are at your most vulnerable.
Discrimination: a fitness app can sell your data to a health insurance company, preventing you from getting coverage in the future.
All of this is happening in the world today.
But of course, not all uses of data are malign.
Some are just flawed or need more work, and some are truly great.
And there is some good news as well.
The dating companies changed their policies globally after we filed a legal complaint.
But organizations such as mine that fight for consumers' rights can't be everywhere.
Nor can consumers fix this on their own, because if we know that something innocent we said will come back to haunt us, we will stop speaking.
If we know that we are being watched and monitored, we will change our behavior.
And if we can't control who has our data and how it is being used, we have lost the control of our lives.
The stories I have told you today are not random examples.
They are everywhere, and they are a sign that things need to change.
And how can we achieve that change?
Well, companies need to realize that by prioritizing privacy and security, they can build trust and loyalty to their users.
Governments must create a safer internet by ensuring enforcement and up-to-date rules.
And us, the citizens?
We can use our voice to remind the world that technology can only truly benefit society if it respects basic rights.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Ten years ago, I had my first exhibition here.
I had no idea if it would work or was at all possible, but with a few small steps and a very steep learning curve, I made my first sculpture, called "The Lost Correspondent."
Teaming up with a marine biologist and a local dive center, I submerged the work off the coast of Grenada, in an area decimated by Hurricane Ivan.
And then this incredible thing happened.
It transformed.
One sculpture became two.
Two quickly became 26.
And before I knew it, we had the world's first underwater sculpture park.
In 2009, I moved to Mexico and started by casting local fisherman.
This grew to a small community, to almost an entire movement of people in defense of the sea.
And then finally, to an underwater museum, with over 500 living sculptures.
Gardening, it seems, is not just for greenhouses.
We've since scaled up the designs: "Ocean Atlas," in the Bahamas, rising 16 feet up to the surface and weighing over 40 tons, to now currently in Lanzarote, where I'm making an underwater botanical garden, the first of its kind in the Atlantic Ocean.
Each project, we use materials and designs that help encourage life; a long-lasting pH-neutral cement provides a stable and permanent platform.
It is textured to allow coral polyps to attach.
We position them down current from natural reefs so that after spawning, there's areas for them to settle.
The formations are all configured so that they aggregate fish on a really large scale.
Even this VW Beetle has an internal living habitat to encourage crustaceans such as lobsters and sea urchins.
So why exhibit my work in the ocean?
Because honestly, it's really not easy.
When you're in the middle of the sea under a hundred-foot crane, trying to lower eight tons down to the sea floor, you start to wonder whether I shouldn't have taken up watercolor painting instead.
(Laughter) But in the end, the results always blow my mind.
(Music) The ocean is the most incredible exhibition space an artist could ever wish for.
You have amazing lighting effects changing by the hour, explosions of sand covering the sculptures in a cloud of mystery, a unique timeless quality and the procession of inquisitive visitors, each lending their own special touch to the site.
(Music) But over the years, I've realized that the greatest thing about what we do, the really humbling thing about the work, is that as soon as we submerge the sculptures, they're not ours anymore, because as soon as we sink them, the sculptures, they belong to the sea.
As new reefs form, a new world literally starts to evolve, a world that continuously amazes me.
It's a bit of a cliché, but nothing man-made can ever match the imagination of nature.
Sponges look like veins across the faces.
Staghorn coral morphs the form.
Fireworms scrawl white lines as they feed.
Tunicates explode from the faces.
Sea urchins crawl across the bodies feeding at night.
Coralline algae applies a kind of purple paint.
The deepest red I've ever seen in my life lives underwater.
Gorgonian fans oscillate with the waves.
Purple sponges breathe water like air.
And grey angelfish glide silently overhead.
And the amazing response we've had to these works tells me that we've managed to plug into something really primal, because it seems that these images translate across the world, and that's made me focus on my responsibility as an artist and about what I'm trying to achieve.
I'm standing here today on this boat in the middle of the ocean, and this couldn't be a better place to talk about the really, really important effect of my work.
Because as we all know, our reefs are dying, and our oceans are in trouble.
So here's the thing: the most used, searched and shared image of all my work thus far is this.
And I think this is for a reason, or at least I hope it is.
What I really hope is that people are beginning to understand that when we think of the environment and the destruction of nature, that we need to start thinking about our oceans, too.
Since building these sites, we've seen some phenomenal and unexpected results.
Besides creating over 800 square meters of new habitats and living reef, visitors to the marine park in Cancun now divide half their time between the museum and the natural reefs, providing significant rest for natural, overstressed areas.
Visitors to "Ocean Atlas" in the Bahamas highlighted a leak from a nearby oil refinery.
The subsequent international media forced the local government to pledge 10 million dollars in coastal cleanups.
The sculpture park in Grenada was instrumental in the government designating a spot -- a marine-protected area.
Entrance fees to the park now help fund park rangers to manage tourism and fishing quotas.
The site was actually listed as a "Wonder of the World" by National Geographic.
So why are we all here today in this room?
What do we all have in common?
I think we all share a fear that we don't protect our oceans enough.
And one way of thinking about this is that we don't regard our oceans as sacred, and we should.
When we see incredible places -- like the Himalayas or the La Sagrada Família, or the Mona Lisa, even -- when we see these incredible places and things, we understand their importance.
We call them sacred, and we do our best to cherish them, to protect them and to keep them safe.
But in order to do that, we are the ones that have to assign that value; otherwise, it will be desecrated by someone who doesn't understand that value.
So I want to finish up tonight by talking about sacred things.
When we were naming the site in Cancun, we named it a museum for a very important and simple reason: museums are places of preservation, of conservation and of education.
They're places where we keep objects of great value to us, where we simply treasure them for them being themselves.
If someone was to throw an egg at the Sistine Chapel, we'd all go crazy.
If someone wanted to build a seven-star hotel at the bottom of the Grand Canyon, then we would laugh them out of Arizona.
Yet every day we dredge, pollute and overfish our oceans.
And I think it's easier for us to do that, because when we see the ocean, we don't see the havoc we're wreaking.
Because for most people, the ocean is like this.
And it's really hard to think of something that's just so plain and so enormous, as fragile.
It's simply too massive, too vast, too endless.
And what do you see here?
I think most people actually look past to the horizon.
So I think there's a real danger that we never really see the sea, and if we don't really see it, if it doesn't have its own iconography, if we miss its majesty, then there's a big danger that we take it for granted.
Cancun is famous for spring break, tequila and foam parties.
And its waters are where frat boys can ride around on Jet Skis and banana boats.
But because of our work there, there's now a little corner of Cancun that is simply precious for being itself.
And we don't want to stop in Grenada, in Cancun or the Bahamas.
Just last month, I installed these Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse in the Thames River, in central London, right in front of the Houses of Parliament, putting a stark message about climate change in front of the people that have the power to help change things.
Because for me, this is just the beginning of the mission.
We want to team up with other inventors, creators, philanthropists, educators, biologists, to see better futures for our oceans.
And we want to see beyond sculpture, beyond art, even.
Say you're a 14-year-old kid from the city, and you've never seen the ocean.
And instead of getting taken to the natural history museum or an aquarium, you get taken out to the ocean, to an underwater Noah's Ark, which you can access through a dry-glass viewing tunnel, where you can see all the wildlife of the land be colonized by the wildlife of the ocean.
Clearly, it would blow your mind.
So let's think big and let's think deep.
Who knows where our imagination and willpower can lead us?
I hope that by bringing our art into the ocean, that not only do we take advantage of amazing creativity and visual impact of the setting, but that we are also giving something back, and by encouraging new environments to thrive, and in some way opening up a new -- or maybe it's a really old way of seeing the seas: as delicate, precious places, worthy of our protection.
Our oceans are sacred.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The "Dirty Jobs" crew and I were called to a little town in Colorado, called Craig.
It's only a couple dozen square miles.
It's in the Rockies.
And the job in question was sheep rancher.
My role on the show, for those of you who haven't seen it -- it's pretty simple.
I'm an apprentice, and I work with the people who do the jobs in question.
And my responsibilities are to simply try and keep up, and give an honest account of what it's like to be these people for one day in their life.
The job in question: herding sheep.
Great.
We go to Craig and we check into a hotel, and I realize the next day that castration is going to be an absolute part of this work.
Normally, I never do any research at all.
But this is a touchy subject, and I work for the Discovery Channel, and we want to portray accurately whatever it is we do.
And we certainly want to do it with a lot of respect for the animals.
So I call the Humane Society and I say, "Look, I'm going to be castrating some lambs.
Can you tell me the deal?"
And they're like, "Yeah, it's pretty straightforward."
They use a band, basically, a rubber band, like this, only a little smaller.
This one was actually around the playing cards I got yesterday -- (Laughter) But it had a certain familiarity to it.
And I said, "Well, what exactly is the process?"
And they said, "The band is applied to the tail, tightly.
And then another band is applied to the scrotum, tightly.
Blood flow is slowly retarded; a week later the parts in question fall off.
"Great -- got it."
OK, I call the SPCA to confirm this.
They confirm it.
I also call PETA just for fun, and they don't like it, but they confirm it.
OK, that's basically how you do it.
So the next day I go out.
And I'm given a horse and we go get the lambs and we take them to a pen that we built, and we go about the business of animal husbandry.
Melanie is the wife of Albert.
Albert is the shepherd in question.
Melanie picks up the lamb, one hand on both legs on the right, likewise on the left.
Lamb goes on the post, she opens it up.
Alright.
Great.
Albert goes in, I follow Albert, the crew is around.
I always watch the process done the first time before I try it.
Being an apprentice, you know, you do that.
Albert reaches in his pocket to pull out, you know, this black rubber band, but what comes out instead is a knife.
And I'm like, "Hmm, that's not rubber at all," you know?
(Laughter) And he kind of flicked it open in a way that caught the sun that was just coming over the Rockies, it was very -- (Laughter) It was ... it was impressive.
In the space of about two seconds, Albert had the knife between the cartilage of the tail, right next to the butt of the lamb, and very quickly, the tail was gone and in the bucket that I was holding.
A second later, with a big thumb and a well-calloused forefinger, he had the scrotum firmly in his grasp.
And he pulled it toward him, like so, and he took the knife and he put it on the tip.
"Now, you think you know what's coming, Michael, You don't, OK?"
(Laughter) He snips it, throws the tip over his shoulder, and then grabs the scrotum and pushes it upward, and then his head dips down, obscuring my view.
But what I hear is a slurping sound, and a noise that sounds like Velcro being yanked off a sticky wall, and I am not even kidding.
Can we roll the video?
No, I'm kidding, we don't -- (Laughter) I thought it best to talk in pictures.
I do something now I've never, ever done on a "Dirty Jobs" shoot, ever.
I say, "Time out.
Stop."
You guys know the show, we use take one; we don't do take two.
There's no writing, there's no scripting, there's no nonsense.
We don't fool around, we don't rehearse -- we shoot what we get!
I said, "Stop.
This is nuts."
I mean -- (Laughter) "This is crazy.
We can't do this."
And Albert's like, "What?"
And I'm like, "I don't know what just happened, but there are testicles in this bucket, and that's not how we do it."
He said "Well, that's how we do it."
I said, "Why would you do it this way?"
And before I even let him explain, I said, "I want to do it the right way, with the rubber bands."
And he says, "Like the Humane Society?"
I said, "Yes, like the Humane Society.
Let's do something that doesn't make the lamb squeal and bleed.
We're on in five continents, dude!
We're on twice a day on the Discovery -- we can't do this."
He says, "OK."
He goes to his box and pulls out a bag of these little rubber bands.
Melanie picks up another lamb, puts it on the post, band goes on the tail, band goes on the scrotum.
Lamb goes on the ground, lamb takes two steps, falls down, gets up, shakes a little, takes another couple steps, falls down.
I'm like, this is not a good sign for this lamb, at all.
Gets up, walks to the corner.
It's quivering, and it lies down and it's in obvious distress.
And I'm looking at the lamb and I say, "Albert, how long?
When does he get up?"
He's like, "A day?"
I said, "A day!
How long does it take them to fall off?"
"A week."
Meanwhile, the lamb that he had just done his little procedure on is, you know, he's just prancing around, bleeding stopped.
He's, you know, nibbling on some grass, frolicking.
And I was just so blown away at how completely wrong I was, in that second.
And I was reminded how utterly wrong I am, so much of the time.
(Laughter) And I was especially reminded of what a ridiculously short straw I had that day, because now I had to do what Albert had just done, and there are like 100 of these lambs in the pen.
And suddenly, this whole thing's starting to feel like a German porno, and I'm like -- (Laughter) Melanie picks up the lamb, puts it on the post, opens it up.
Albert hands me the knife.
I go in, tail comes off.
I go in, I grab the scrotum, tip comes off.
Albert instructs, "Push it way up there."
I do.
"Push it further."
I do.
The testicles emerge.
They look like thumbs, coming right at you.
And he says, "Bite 'em.
Just bite 'em off."
(Laughter) And I heard him, I heard all the words -- (Laughter) Like, how did I get here?
How did -- I mean -- how did I get here?
It's just -- it's one of those moments where the brain goes off on its own, and suddenly, I'm standing there in the Rockies, and all I can think of is the Aristotelian definition of a tragedy.
You know, Aristotle says a tragedy is that moment when the hero comes face to face with his true identity.
(Laughter) And I'm like, "What is this jacked-up metaphor?
I don't like what I'm thinking right now."
And I can't get this thought out of my head, and I can't get that vision out of my sight, so I did what I had to do.
I went in and I took them.
I took them like this, and I yanked my head back.
And I'm standing there with two testicles on my chin.
(Laughter) And now I can't get -- I can't shake the metaphor.
I'm still in "Poetics," in Aristotle, and I'm thinking -- out of nowhere, two terms come crashing into my head, that I hadn't heard since my classics professor in college drilled them there.
And they are "anagnorisis" and "peripeteia."
Anagnorisis and peripeteia.
Anagnorisis is the Greek word for discovery.
Literally, the transition from ignorance to knowledge is anagnorisis.
It's what our network does; it's what "Dirty Jobs" is.
And I'm up to my neck in anagnorises every single day.
Great.

