So hidden from our eyes, plant roots are colonized by a fungus called arbuscule mycorrhizae.
Now the fungus forms these complex networks underground of fine filaments thinner than even threads of cotton.
So follow one of these fungi, and it connects multiple plants simultaneously.
You can think of it as an underground subway system, where each root is a station, where resources are loaded and unloaded.
And it's also very dense, so roughly the length of many meters, even a kilometer, in a single gram of dirt.
So that's the length of 10 football fields in just a thimbleful of soil.
And it's everywhere.
So if you passed over a tree, a shrub, a vine, even a tiny weed, you passed over a mycorrhizal network.
Roughly 80 percent of all plant species are associated with these mycorrhizal fungi.
So what does a root covered in fungi have to do with our global economy?
And why as an evolutionary biologist have I spent the last 10 years of my life learning economic jargon?
Well, the first thing you need to understand is that trade deals made by plant and fungal partners are surprisingly similar to those made by us, but perhaps even more strategic.
You see, plant and fungal partners, they're not exchanging stocks and bonds, they're exchanging essential resources, and for the fungus, that's sugars and fats.
It gets all of its carbon directly from the plant partner.
So much carbon, so every year, roughly five billion tons of carbon from plants go into this network underground.
For the root, what they need is phosphorus and nitrogen, so by exchanging their carbon they get access to all of the nutrients collected by that fungal network.
So to make the trade, the fungus penetrates into the root cell of the host and forms a tiny structure called an arbuscule, which is Latin for "little tree."
Now, you can think of this as the physical stock exchange of the trade market.
So up until now, it seems very harmonious.
Right?
I scratch your back, you scratch mine, both partners get what they need.
But here is where we need to pause and understand the power of evolution and natural selection.
You see, there's no room for amateur traders on this market.
Making the right trade strategy determines who lives and who dies.
Now, I use the word strategy, but of course plant and fungi, they don't have brains.
They're making these exchanges in the absence of anything that we would consider as thought.
But, as scientists, we use behavioral terms such as strategy to describe behaviors to certain conditions, actions and reactions that are actually programmed into the DNA of the organism.
So I started studying these trade strategies when I was 19 years old and I was living in the tropical rainforests of Panama.
Now, everybody at the time was interested in this incredible diversity aboveground.
And it was hyperdiversity.
These are tropical rainforests.
But I was interested in the complexity belowground.
We knew that the networks existed, and we knew they were important, and I'm going to say it again, by important I mean important, so the basis of all plant nutrition for all the diversity that you do see aboveground.
But at the time, we didn't know how these networks worked.
We didn't know how they functioned.
Why did only certain plants interact with certain fungi?
So fast-forward to when I started my own group, and we really began to play with this trade market.
You see, we would manipulate conditions.
We would create a good trading partner by growing a plant in the sun and a poor trading partner by growing it in the shade.
We would then connect these with a fungal network.
And we found that the fungi were consistently good at discriminating among good and bad trading partners.
They would allocate more resources to the host plant giving them more carbon.
Now, we would run the reciprocal experiments where we would inoculate a host plant with good and bad fungi, and they were also good at discriminating between these trade partners.
So what you have there is the perfect conditions for a market to emerge.
It's a simple market, but it's a market nonetheless, where the better trading partner is consistently favored.
But is it a fair market?
Now this is where you need to understand that, like humans, plants and fungi are incredibly opportunistic.
There's evidence that the fungus, once it penetrates into the plant cell, it can actually hijack the plant's own nutrient uptake system.
It does this by suppressing the plant's own ability to take up nutrients from the soil.
So this creates a dependency of the plant on the fungus.
It's a false addiction, of sorts, whereby the plant has to feed the fungus just to get access to the resources right around its own root.
There's also evidence that the fungi are good at inflating the price of nutrients.
They do this by extracting the nutrients from the soil, but then rather than trading them with the host, they hoard them in their network, so this makes them unavailable to the plant and other competing fungi.
So basic economics, as resource availability goes down, the value goes up.
The plant is forced to pay more for the same amount of resources.
But it's not all in favor of the fungus.
Plants can be extremely cunning as well.
There are some orchids -- and I always think orchids somehow seem like the most devious of the plant species in the world -- and there are some orchids that just tap directly into the network and steal all their carbon.
So these orchids, they don't even make green leaves to photosynthesize.
They're just white.
So rather than photosynthesizing, tap into the network, steal the carbon and give nothing in return.
Now I think it's fair to say that these types of parasites also flourish in our human markets.
So as we began to decode these strategies, we learned some lessons.
And the first one was that there's no altruism in this system.
There's no trade favors.
We don't see strong evidence of the fungus helping dying or struggling plants unless it directly benefits the fungus itself.
Now I'm not saying if this is good or bad.
Unlike humans, a fungus, of course, cannot judge its own morality.
And as a biologist, I'm not advocating for these types of ruthless neoliberal market dynamics enacted by the fungi.
But the trade system, it provides us with a benchmark to study what an economy looks like when it's been shaped by natural selection for hundreds of millions of years in the absence of morality, when strategies are just based on the gathering and processing of information, uncontaminated by cognition: no jealousy, no spite, but no hope, no joy.
So we've made progress in decoding the most basic trade principles at this point, but as scientists we always want to take it one step further, and we're interested in more complex economic dilemmas.
And specifically we're interested in the effects of inequality.
So inequality has really become a defining feature of today's economic landscape.
But the challenges of inequality are not unique to the human world.
I think as humans we tend to think that everything's unique to us, but organisms in nature must face relentless variation in their access to resources.
How does a fungus that can again be meters long change its trade strategy when it's exposed simultaneously to a rich patch and a poor patch?
And, more generally, how do organisms in nature use trade to their advantage when they're faced with uncertainty in terms of their access to resources?
Here's where I have to let you in on a secret: studying trade underground is incredibly difficult.
You can't see where or when important trade deals take place.
So our group helped pioneer a method, a technology, whereby we could tag nutrients with nanoparticles, fluorescing nanoparticles called quantum dots.
What the quantum dots allow us to do is actually light up the nutrients so we can visually track their movements across the fungal network and into the host root.
So this allows us finally to see the unseen, so we can study how fungi bargain at a small scale with their plant hosts.
So to study inequality, we exposed a fungal network to these varying concentrations of fluorescing phosphorus, mimicking patches of abundance and scarcity across this artificial landscape.
We then carefully quantified fungal trade.
And we found two things.
The first thing we found was that inequality encouraged the fungus to trade more.
So I can use the word "encouraged" or "stimulated" or "forced," but the bottom line is that compared to control conditions, inequality was associated with higher levels of trade.
This is important, because it suggests that evolving a trade partnership in nature can help organisms cope with the uncertainty of accessing resources.
Second, we found that, exposed to inequality, the fungus would move resources from the rich patch of the network, actively transport them to the poor side of the network.
Now, of course, we could see this because the patches were fluorescing in different colors.
So at first, this result was incredibly puzzling.
Was it to help the poor side of the network?
No.
We found that the fungus gained more by first moving the resources to where demand was higher.
Simply by changing where across the network the fungus was trading, it could manipulate the value of those resources.
Now this stimulated us to really dig deeper into how information is shared.
It suggests a high level of sophistication, or at least a medium level of sophistication in an organism with no cognition.
How is it that a fungus can sense market conditions across its network and then make calculations of where and when to trade?
So we wanted to look about information and how it's shared across this network, how the fungus integrates cues.
So to do that, what you need to do is dive deep in and get a higher resolution into the network itself.
We began to study complex flows inside the hyphal network.
So what you're looking at right now is a living fungal network with the cellular contents moving across it.
This is happening in real time, so you can see the time stamp up there.
So this is happening right now.
This video isn't sped up.
This is what is happening under our feet right now.
And there's a couple of things that I want you to notice.
It speeds up, it slows down, it switches directions.
So we're working now with biophysicists to try to dissect this complexity.
How is the fungus using these complex flow patterns to share and process information and make these trade decisions?
Are fungi better at making trade calculations than us?
Now here's where we can potentially borrow models from nature.
We're increasingly reliant on computer algorithms to make us profitable trades in split-second time scales.
But computer algorithms and fungi, they both operate in similar, uncognitive ways.
The fungi just happens to be a living machine.
What would happen if we compare and compete the trading strategies of these two?
Who would win?
The tiny capitalist that's been around since before and the fall of the dinosaurs?
My money is on the fungus.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Around the globe, there are approximately 60 million people who have been forced to leave their homes to escape war, violence, and persecution.
The majority of them have become internally displaced persons, which means they have fled their homes but are still within their own countries.
Others have crossed a border and sought shelter outside of their own countries.
They are commonly referred to as refugees.
But what exactly does that term mean?
The world has known refugees for millennia, but the modern definition was drafted in the UN's 1951 Convention relating to the status of refugees in response to mass persecutions and displacements of the Second World War.
It defines a refugee as someone who is outside their country of nationality, and is unable to return to their home country because of well-founded fears of being persecuted.
That persecution may be due to their race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion, and is often related to war and violence.
Today, roughly half the world's refugees are children, some of them unaccompanied by an adult, a situation that makes them especially vulnerable to child labor or sexual exploitation.
Each refugee's story is different, and many must undergo dangerous journeys with uncertain outcomes.
But before we get to what their journeys involve, let's clear one thing up.
There's a lot of confusion regarding the difference between the terms "migrant" and "refugee."
"Migrants" usually refers to people who leave their country for reasons not related to persecution, such as searching for better economic opportunities or leaving drought-stricken areas in search of better circumstances.
There are many people around the world who have been displaced because of natural disasters, food insecurities, and other hardships, but international law, rightly or wrongly, only recognizes those fleeing conflict and violence as refugees.
So what happens when someone flees their country?
Most refugee journeys are long and perilous with limited access to shelter, water, or food.
Since the departure can be sudden and unexpected, belongings might be left behind, and people who are evading conflict often do not have the required documents, like visas, to board airplanes and legally enter other countries.
Financial and political factors can also prevent them from traveling by standard routes.
This means they can usually only travel by land or sea, and may need to entrust their lives to smugglers to help them cross borders.
Whereas some people seek safety with their families, others attempt passage alone and leave their loved ones behind with the hopes of being reunited later.
This separation can be traumatic and unbearably long.
While more than half the world's refugees are in cities, sometimes the first stop for a person fleeing conflict is a refugee camp, usually run by the United Nations Refugee Agency or local governments.
Refugee camps are intended to be temporary structures, offering short-term shelter until inhabitants can safely return home, be integrated to the host country, or resettle in another country.
But resettlement and long-term integration options are often limited.
So many refugees are left with no choice but to remain in camps for years and sometimes even decades.
Once in a new country, the first legal step for a displaced person is to apply for asylum.
At this point, they are an asylum seeker and not officially recognized as a refugee until the application has been accepted.
While countries by and large agree on one definition of refugee, every host country is responsible for examining all requests for asylum and deciding whether applicants can be granted the status of refugee.
Different countries guidelines can vary substantially.
Host countries have several duties towards people they have recognized as refugees, like the guarantee of a minimum standard of treatment and non-discrimination.
The most basic obligation towards refugees is non-refoulement, a principle preventing a nation from sending an individual to a country where their life and freedom are threatened.
In reality, however, refugees are frequently the victims of inconsistent and discriminatory treatment.
They're increasingly obliged to rebuild their lives in the face of xenophobia and racism.
And all too often, they aren't permitted to enter the work force and are fully dependent on humanitarian aid.
In addition, far too many refugee children are out of school due to lack of funding for education programs.
If you go back in your own family history, chances are you will discover that at a certain point, your ancestors were forced from their homes, either escaping a war or fleeing discrimination and persecution.
It would be good of us to remember their stories when we hear of refugees currently displaced, searching for a new home.
Reaching heights of over 100 meters, Californian sequoias tower over Earth’s other estimated 60,000 tree species.
Growing in the misty Sierra Nevada mountains, their massive trunks support the tallest known trees in the world.
But even these behemoths seem to have their limits.
No sequoia on record has been able to grow taller than 130 meters – and many researchers say these trees won’t beat that cap even if they live for thousands of years to come.
So what exactly is stopping these trees from growing taller, forever?
It all comes down to sap.
In order for trees to grow, they need to bring sugars obtained from photosynthesis and nutrients brought in through the root system to wherever growth is happening.
And just like blood circulates in the human body, trees are designed to circulate two kinds of sap throughout their bodies – carrying all the substances a tree’s cells need to live.
The first is phloem sap.
Containing the sugars generated in leaves during photosynthesis, phloem sap is thick, like honey, and flows down the plant’s phloem tissue to distribute sugar throughout the tree.
By the end of its journey, the phloem sap has thinned into a watery substance, pooling at the base of the tree.
Right beside the phloem is the tree’s other tissue type: the xylem.
This tissue is packed with nutrients and ions like calcium, potassium, and iron, which the tree has absorbed through its roots.
Here at the tree’s base, there are more of these particles in one tissue than the other, so the water from the phloem sap is absorbed into the xylem to correct the balance.
This process, called osmotic movement, creates nutrient-rich xylem sap, which will then travel up the trunk to spread those nutrients through the tree.
But this journey faces a formidable obstacle: gravity.
To accomplish this herculean task, the xylem relies on three forces: transpiration, capillary action, and root pressure.
As part of photosynthesis, leaves open and close pores called stomata.
These openings allow oxygen and carbon dioxide in and out of the leaf, but they also create an opening through which water evaporates.
This evaporation, called transpiration, creates negative pressure in the xylem, pulling watery xylem sap up the tree.
This pull is aided by a fundamental property of water called capillary action.
In narrow tubes, the attraction between water molecules and the adhesive forces between the water and its environment can beat out gravity.
This capillary motion is in full effect in xylem filaments thinner than human hair.
And where these two forces pull the sap, the osmotic movement at the tree’s base creates root pressure, pushing fresh xylem sap up the trunk.
Together these forces launch sap to dizzying heights, distributing nutrients, and growing new leaves to photosynthesize – far above the tree’s roots.
But despite these sophisticated systems, every centimeter is a fight against gravity.
As trees grow taller and taller, the supply of these vital fluids begins to dwindle.
At a certain height, trees can no longer afford the lost water that evaporates during photosynthesis.
And without the photosynthesis needed to support additional growth, the tree instead turns its resources towards existing branches.
This model, known as the “hydraulic limitation hypothesis,” is currently our best explanation for why trees have limited heights, even in perfect growing conditions.
And using this model alongside growth rates and known needs for nutrients and photosynthesis, researchers have been able to propose height limits for specific species.
So far these limits have held up – even the world’s tallest tree still falls about fifteen meters below the cap.
Researchers are still investigating the possible explanations for this limit, and there may not be one universal reason why trees stop growing.
But until we learn more, the height of trees is yet another way that gravity, literally, shapes life on Earth.
So, where are the robots?
We've been told for 40 years already that they're coming soon.
Very soon they'll be doing everything for us.
They'll be cooking, cleaning, buying things, shopping, building.
But they aren't here.
Meanwhile, we have illegal immigrants doing all the work, but we don't have any robots.
So what can we do about that?
What can we say?
So I want to give a little bit of a different perspective of how we can perhaps look at these things in a little bit of a different way.
And this is an x-ray picture of a real beetle, and a Swiss watch, back from '88.
You look at that -- what was true then is certainly true today.
We can still make the pieces.
We can make the right pieces.
We can make the circuitry of the right computational power, but we can't actually put them together to make something that will actually work and be as adaptive as these systems.
So let's try to look at it from a different perspective.
Let's summon the best designer, the mother of all designers.

