Mind the electrics.
That is safe, sterile drinking water.
(Applause) Cheers.
(Applause) There you go Chris.
(Applause) What's it taste of?
Chris Anderson: Delicious.
Michael Pritchard: Okay.
Let's see Chris's program throughout the rest of the show.
Okay?
(Laughter) Okay.
Lifesaver bottle is used by thousands of people around the world.
It'll last for 6,000 liters.
And when it's expired, using failsafe technology, the system will shut off, protecting the user.
Pop the cartridge out.
Pop a new one in.
It's good for another 6,000 liters.
So let's look at the applications.
Traditionally, in a crisis, what do we do?
We ship water.
Then, after a few weeks, we set up camps.
And people are forced to come into the camps to get their safe drinking water.
What happens when 20,000 people congregate in a camp?
Diseases spread.
More resources are required.
The problem just becomes self-perpetuating.
But by thinking differently, and shipping these, people can stay put.
They can make their own sterile drinking water, and start to get on with rebuilding their homes and their lives.
Now, it doesn't require a natural disaster for this to work.
Using the old thinking, of national infrastructure and pipe work, is too expensive.
When you run the numbers on a calculator, you run out of noughts.
So here is the "thinking different" bit.
Instead of shipping water, and using man-made processes to do it, let's use Mother Nature.
She's got a fantastic system.
She picks the water up from there, desalinates it, for free, transports it over there, and dumps it onto the mountains, rivers, and streams.
And where do people live?
Near water.
All we've go to do is make it sterile.
How do we do that?
Well, we could use the Lifesaver bottle.
Or we could use one of these.
The same technology, in a jerry can.
This will process 25,000 liters of water; that's good enough for a family of four, for three years.
And how much does it cost?
About half a cent a day to run.
Thank you.
(Applause) So, by thinking differently, and processing water at the point of use, mothers and children no longer have to walk four hours a day to collect their water.
They can get it from a source nearby.
So with just eight billion dollars, we can hit the millennium goal's target of halving the number of people without access to safe drinking water.
To put that into context, The U.K. government spends about 12 billion pounds a year on foreign aid.
But why stop there?
With 20 billion dollars, everyone can have access to safe drinking water.
So the three-and-a-half billion people that suffer every year as a result, and the two million kids that die every year, will live.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) TC Milan: How you doing tonight?
New York!
(Music) Here we go.
(Singing) I don't need another lover I got my friends No, I don't need another mother -- bet that you can guess Oh baby, can you talk right act tight, don't fight follow my rules?
Oh baby, can you stay sweet upbeat fill me with all your cool?
Are you man enough for me?
Nicki B: Are you man enough for me?
TM: Are you man enough to be?
NB: Are you man enough to be?
TM: Are you man enough for me?
NB: Are you man enough for me?
TM: Oh, are you man enough to be?
NB: Are you man enough to be?
TM: C'mon.
(Singing) Be my man (Music) That's right.
(Music) Give it to 'em.
NB: Hit it good, c'mon, do better, give me all the feel Oooh Keep it hot, assess my pleasure Just keep it real TM: Are you man enough for me?
NB: Are you man enough for me?
TM: Are you man enough to be?
NB: Are you man enough to be?
TM: Are you man enough for me?
NB: Are you man enough for me?
TM: Are you man enough to be?
NB: Are you man enough to be?
TM: What?
(Singing) Be my man (Music) NB: Be my man TM: C'mon, Che-Che.
(Music) (Music changes) Alright, this next one's "Bohanna."
(Singing) All the way back to where we began Out of the mess they put us in Le Chev: Bang, bang, off the chain (Singing) Oooh LC: Bang, bang, through the pain (Singing) Oh LC: Bang, bang, off the chain (Singing) Oooh LC: Bang, bang, through the pain One, two, three, let's go!
(Singing) Bohanna Music for dancing Bohanna Flowers where you go Bohanna Music for dancing Bohanna We clap, clap our hands for you NB: Little bit of rain makes the window shine -- TC: Window shine NB: Dance with Bohanna, drink that red, red wine TM: Red, red wine NB: Little bit of rain makes the window shine TM: Window shine NB: Dance with Bohanna, drink that red, red wine Bohanna Music for dancing Bohanna Flowers where you go Bohanna Music for dancing Bohanna We clap, clap our hands for you (Music) (Music changes) TM: This is the last song.
(Cheers) Thank you!
(Music) (Singing) I was broken down torn up and turned around I got lost in the darkest cloud I felt there was no way out No I almost lost control I forgot what I was living for But I still got my energy and the music gives me all I need We dance, we make the club our own We chant at night to free our souls It's that time of the night when the music is right Hey, DJ, won't you play my song one more time?
We dance Oooh We dance, we make the club our home We chant at night to free our souls You've been kicked around beat up and beat down And when you make a joyful sound -- oh ...
Someone's there to shut it down So much to overcome That struggle it's never, never done Still got that energy And the music gives you all you need We dance, we make the club our own We chant at night to free our souls It's that time of the night when the music is right Hey, DJ, won't you play my song one more time?
We dance (Music) We dance, we make the club our own We chant at night to free our souls We dance, we make the club our home -- TM: Can you guys clap with us?
(Singing) We chant at night to free our souls TM: Alright, New York.
It's that time.
It's that TED Talks time.
We're sitting down but we're grooving out, right?
(Singing) We dance TM: You know we dance After this, we're going to go dance, all of us, altogether at Chever's house.
(Singing) We dance (Clapping) Alright, now we're just going to do a simple wave, right?
Easy, from our seats.
(Singing) We dance NB: Uh huh.
TM: There we go.
(Singing) We dance TM: One, two, one, two, three -- (Singing) We dance, we make the club our home We chant at night to free our souls It's that time of the night when the music is right Hey, DJ, won't you play my song one more time?
We dance Oooh.
We dance, we make the club our own We chant at night to free our souls We dance (Music ends) Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
At 7:45 a.m., I open the doors to a building dedicated to building, yet only breaks me down.
I march down hallways cleaned up after me every day by regular janitors, but I never have the decency to honor their names.
Lockers left open like teenage boys' mouths when teenage girls wear clothes that covers their insecurities but exposes everything else.
Masculinity mimicked by men who grew up with no fathers, camouflage worn by bullies who are dangerously armed but need hugs.
Teachers paid less than what it costs them to be here.
Oceans of adolescents come here to receive lessons but never learn to swim, part like the Red Sea when the bell rings.
This is a training ground.
My high school is Chicago, diverse and segregated on purpose.
Social lines are barbed wire.
Labels like "Regulars" and "Honors" resonate.
I am an Honors but go home with Regular students who are soldiers in territory that owns them.
This is a training ground to sort out the Regulars from the Honors, a reoccurring cycle built to recycle the trash of this system.
Trained at a young age to capitalize, letters taught now that capitalism raises you but you have to step on someone else to get there.
This is a training ground where one group is taught to lead and the other is made to follow.
No wonder so many of my people spit bars, because the truth is hard to swallow.
The need for degrees has left so many people frozen.
Homework is stressful, but when you go home every day and your home is work, you don't want to pick up any assignments.
Reading textbooks is stressful, but reading does not matter when you feel your story is already written, either dead or getting booked.
Taking tests is stressful, but bubbling in a Scantron does not stop bullets from bursting.
I hear education systems are failing, but I believe they're succeeding at what they're built to do -- to train you, to keep you on track, to track down an American dream that has failed so many of us all.
(Applause)
On May 27th, 1941, the German battleship Bismarck sank in a fierce firefight, leaving only 118 of her 2,200 crew members alive.
But when a British destroyer came to collect the prisoners, they found an unexpected survivor - a black and white cat clinging to a floating plank.
For the next several months this cat hunted rats and raised British morale - until a sudden torpedo strike shattered the hull and sank the ship.
But, miraculously, not the cat.
Nicknamed Unsinkable Sam, he rode to Gibraltar with the rescued crew and served as a ship cat on three more vessels – one of which also sank - before retiring to the Belfast Home for Sailors.
Many may not think of cats as serviceable sailors, or cooperative companions of any kind.
But cats have been working alongside humans for thousands of years - helping us just as often as we help them.
So how did these solitary creatures go from wild predator to naval officer to sofa sidekick?
The domestication of the modern house cat can be traced back to more than 10,000 years ago in the Fertile Crescent, at the start of the Neolithic era.
People were learning to bend nature to their will, producing much more food than farmers could eat at one time.
These Neolithic farmers stored their excess grain in large pits and short, clay silos.
But these stores of food attracted hordes of rodents, as well as their predator, Felis silvestris lybica - the wildcat found across North Africa and Southwest Asia.
These wildcats were fast, fierce, carnivorous hunters.
And they were remarkably similar in size and appearance to today’s domestic cats.
The main differences being that ancient wildcats were more muscular, had striped coats, and were less social towards other cats and humans.
The abundance of prey in rodent-infested granaries drew in these typically solitary animals.
And as the wildcats learned to tolerate the presence of humans and other cats during mealtime, we think that farmers likewise tolerated the cats in exchange for free pest control.
The relationship was so beneficial that the cats migrated with Neolithic farmers from Anatolia into Europe and the Mediterranean.
Vermin were a major scourge of the seven seas.
They ate provisions and gnawed at lines of rope, so cats had long since become essential sailing companions.
Around the same time these Anatolian globe trotting cats set sail, the Egyptians domesticated their own local cats.
Revered for their ability to dispatch venomous snakes, catch birds, and kill rats, domestic cats became important to Egyptian religious culture.
They gained immortality in frescos, hieroglyphs, statues, and even tombs, mummified alongside their owners.
Egyptian ship cats cruised the Nile, holding poisonous river snakes at bay.
And after graduating to larger vessels, they too began to migrate from port to port.
During the time of the Roman Empire, ships traveling between India and Egypt carried the lineage of the central Asian wildcat F. s. ornata.
Centuries later, in the Middle Ages, Egyptian cats voyaged up to the Baltic Sea on the ships of Viking seafarers.
And both the Near Eastern and North African wildcats – probably tamed at this point -- continued to travel across Europe, eventually setting sail for Australia and the Americas.
Today, most house cats have descended from either the Near Eastern or the Egyptian lineage of F.s.lybica.
But close analysis of the genomes and coat patterns of modern cats tells us that unlike dogs, which have undergone centuries of selective breeding, modern cats are genetically very similar to ancient cats.
And apart from making them more social and docile, we’ve done little to alter their natural behaviors.
In other words, cats today are more or less as they’ve always been: Wild animals.
Fierce hunters.
Creatures that don’t see us as their keepers.
And given our long history together, they might not be wrong.
(Hammer) (Laughter) (Microwave beeps) (Laughter) You probably all agree with me that this is a very nice road.
It's made of asphalt, and asphalt is a very nice material to drive on, but not always, especially not on these days as today, when it's raining a lot.
Then you can have a lot of splash water in the asphalt.
And especially if you then ride with your bicycle, and pass these cars, then that's not very nice.
Also, asphalt can create a lot of noise.
It's a noisy material, and if we produce roads like in the Netherlands, very close to cities, then we would like a silent road.
The solution for that is to make roads out of porous asphalt.
Porous asphalt, a material that we use now in most of the highways in the Netherlands, it has pores and water can just rain through it, so all the rainwater will flow away to the sides, and you have a road that's easy to drive on, so no splash water anymore.
Also the noise will disappear in these pores.
Because it's very hollow, all the noise will disappear, so it's a very silent road.
It also has disadvantages, of course, and the disadvantage of this road is that raveling can occur.
What is raveling?
You see that in this road that the stones at the surface come off.
First you get one stone, then several more, and more and more and more and more, and then they -- well, I will not do that.
(Laughter) But they can damage your windshield, so you're not happy with that.
And finally, this raveling can also lead to more and more damage.
Sometimes you can create potholes with that.
Ha.
He's ready.
Potholes, of course, that can become a problem, but we have a solution.
Here you see actually how the damage appears in this material.
It's a porous asphalt, like I said, so you have only a small amount of binder between the stones.
Due to weathering, due to U.V. light, due to oxidation, this binder, this bitumen, the glue between the aggregates is going to shrink, and if it shrinks, it gets micro-cracks, and it delaminates from the aggregates.
Then if you drive over the road, you take out the aggregates -- what we just saw here.
To solve this problem, we thought of self-healing materials.
If we can make this material self-healing, then probably we have a solution.
So what we can do is use steel wool just to clean pans, and the steel wool we can cut in very small pieces, and these very small pieces we can mix to the bitumen.
So then you have asphalt with very small pieces of steel wool in it.
Then you need a machine, like you see here, that you can use for cooking -- an induction machine.
Induction can heat, especially steel; it's very good at that.
Then what you do is you heat up the steel, you melt the bitumen, and the bitumen will flow into these micro-cracks, and the stones are again fixed to the surface.
Today I use a microwave because I cannot take the big induction machine here onstage.
So a microwave is a similar system.
So I put the specimen in, which I'm now going to take out to see what happened.
So this is the specimen coming out now.
So I said we have such an industrial machine in the lab to heat up the specimens.
We tested a lot of specimens there, and then the government, they actually saw our results, and they thought, "Well, that's very interesting.
We have to try that."
So they donated to us a piece of highway, 400 meters of the A58, where we had to make a test track to test this material.
So that's what we did here.
You see where we were making the test road, and then of course this road will last several years without any damage.
That's what we know from practice.
So we took a lot of samples from this road and we tested them in the lab.
So we did aging on the samples, did a lot of loading on it, healed them with our induction machine, and healed them and tested them again.
Several times we can repeat that.
So actually, the conclusion from this research is that if we go on the road every four years with our healing machine -- this is the big version we have made to go on the real road -- if we go on the road every four years we can double the surface life of this road, which of course saves a lot of money.
Well, to conclude, I can say that we made a material using steel fibers, the addition of steel fibers, using induction energy to really increase the surface life of the road, double the surface life you can even do, so it will really save a lot of money with very simple tricks.
And now you're of course curious if it also worked.
So we still have the specimen here.
It's quite warm.
Actually, it still has to cool down first before I can show you that the healing works.
But I will do a trial.
Let's see.
Yeah, it worked.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You are bold, you are brilliant, and you are beautiful.
There is no other woman like you.
You are capable.
Back fat, I see you popping over my bra today, but that's alright.
I'm going to choose to love you.
And thick thighs, you are just so sexy, you can't stop rubbing each other.
(Laughter) That's alright.
I'm going to keep you.
And cellulite, I have not forgotten about you.
I'm going to choose to love you even though you want to take over my whole bottom half, but you're a part of me.
I love you.
It's true, honestly.
I felt free once I realized I was never going to fit the narrow mold that society wanted me to fit in.
I was never going to be perfect enough for an industry that defines perfection from the outside in.
And that's OK.
Rolls, curves, cellulite, all of it.
I love every part of me.
My name is Ashley Graham, and I'm a model and body activist.
Over the last 15 years, I've come to the conclusion that there is no one perfect body.
Because I, like you, possess a wonderfully unique and diverse physique.
Now, the fashion industry may persist to label me as "plus size", but I like to think of it as 'my size'.
In fact, did you know that the plus size fashion industry actually starts at a US size 8?
And it goes up to a US size 16.
So basically what I'm saying is that the majority of this room right now is considered plus size.
How does it make you feel to be labeled?
I really feel like we need to start looking beyond the plus size model paradigms to what it actually means to be a model in 2015.
My journey begins in Lincoln, Nebraska.
I was 12 years old and scouted in a mall.
At 13, I signed with a major modeling agency and was traveling the world.
I was shooting big campaigns, and before I even graduated high school, I had been to multiple different countries.
At 17, I graduated and moved to New York, and while most kids are going through their self-discovery stage in college, my self discovery stage was in the midst of catwalks, catalogs, and casting calls.

